Praise for A Thousand Splendid Suns:

‘A beautiful and upsetting story . . . As easy to remember as The Kite Runner, this book helps us feel like we are in Afghanistan with an open heart’ Isabel Allende

‘Only people with the hardest hearts would not feel emotional’ Glamour

‘I loved this book – I couldn’t stop reading it and finished it in one sitting’ Fiona Bruce

‘An exciting and interesting read’ Literary Review

‘Hosseini shows he is a great storyteller . . . Anyone reading this book will be captured by it’ Mariella Frostrup

‘Few writers today can tell a story that shows the terrible truth of war and suffering so well, and also gives real signs that things can get better and people can be saved’ Waterstone’s Books Quarterly

‘Hosseini has that special gift, a talent for storytelling like Dickens. He is very good at writing long, exciting stories with interesting people’ Daily Telegraph

‘Heartbreaking’ Eve

‘A gripping story of hurt to the body and mind, of times of great hope and great sadness’ Daily Mail

‘A difficult but finally hopeful story about being strong and love’ Woman & Home

‘Forty years of trouble and breaking apart in Afghanistan, a very well-told story and amazing stories of people being destroyed and living through it ... He is a storyteller with amazing power’ Evening Standard

‘A sad and real story that includes love and drama, secrets about people and politics, the start of war and losing your home’ Independent

‘Moving and real, it shows the unfairness of war and being controlled without making the people in the story seem less human’ Image

‘Hosseini writes well and is a natural storyteller’ Spectator

‘Another powerful long story . . . a strong, difficult picture of Afghanistan, but also a beautiful description of the lives and strong hopes of its tough people’ Publishers Weekly

‘Just in case you are asking if Khaled Hosseini’s A Thousand Splendid Suns is as good as The Kite Runner, here is the answer: No. It’s better’ Washington Post Book World

‘Hosseini has done well again . . . A Thousand Splendid Suns is a great success. With Khaled Hosseini, Afghanistan’s story can finally be told’ Financial Times

‘So sad it’s hard to imagine, Hosseini’s great second book is a sad and beautiful sign of how people in Afghanistan suffered and were strong’ Booklist

‘Impossible to stop reading’ Entertainment Weekly

‘The story moves so quickly, it feels very real and exciting . . . very impressive’ Metro

‘It’s the deep connection between two women who have been hurt that gives this book its sad but strong feeling’ People

‘Hosseini shows us that inside every full veil there is a human being’ Tatler Great Reads of 2007

‘What makes this book feel real and interesting is how Hosseini sees the details of everyday life and shows all kinds of human feelings’ Los Angeles Times

‘Another book you won't forget’ Daily Express Great Holiday Reads

‘Makes you feel hopeful and very sad at the same time’ Family Circle

‘Love might not be the first thing you think of when you see Afghanistan hurt by war. But that is the feeling – hidden, strong, beautiful, not allowed, and very patient – that fills the pages’ O, the Oprah Magazine

‘You must read it’ More

‘The story about the things you have to give up to keep hope and happiness, and how love can beat fear. Very good indeed’ New York Daily News

‘Hosseini has an amazing skill at telling stories . . . you would have to be made of stone not to feel emotional about this story’ Irish Independent

‘The hope is this: Even with the unfair cruel things in our world, the main female characters in A Thousand Splendid Suns are strong and keep going, both in the book and in our minds’ Miami Herald

‘Just as sad, just as strong’ Evening Standard Books to Brighten Up Your Summer

‘You won't be able to stop reading, you'll be surprised as you turn the page, crying because of the difficult situation of Mariam and Laila . . . powerful and moving’ Good Book Guide

‘A very interesting read’ Financial Times Summer Books

‘A book that shows the strength of love . . . makes you feel a lot of emotion’ Sunday Express



BY THE SAME AUTHOR
The Kite Runner


A THOUSAND SPLENDID SUNS
Khaled Hosseini
BLOOMSBURY



First printed in Great Britain 2007
Copyright © 2007 by Khaled Hosseini
This electronic version printed 2009 by Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
Khaled Hosseini has said that she is the writer of this book, as allowed by the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
All rights kept. You cannot copy, give out, send, make copies of or use this book (or any part of it) in any way, or by any means (including electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, copying, printing, recording or other ways), without getting written permission first from the publisher. Anyone who does something not allowed with this book might be taken to court for a crime and asked to pay money for damages.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, 36 Soho Square, London W1D 3QA
You can find a record of this book from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-4088-0373-8
www.bloomsbury.com/khaledhosseini
Visit www.bloomsbury.com to find out more about our writers and their books. You can find parts of books, talks with writers, writer events and you can sign up for emails to be the first to hear about our newest books and special offers.

This book is for Haris and Farah, who are the light of my eyes, and for the women of Afghanistan.

Contents
PART ONE
Chapter 1.
Chapter 2.
Chapter 3.
Chapter 4.
Chapter 5.
Chapter 6.
Chapter 7.
Chapter 8.
Chapter 9.
Chapter 10.
Chapter 11.
Chapter 12.
Chapter 13.
Chapter 14. Chapter 15.
PART TWO
Chapter 16.
Chapter 17.
Chapter 18.
Chapter 19.
Chapter 20.
Chapter 21.
Chapter 22.
Chapter 23.
Chapter 24. Chapter 25.
Chapter 26.
PART THREE
Chapter 27.
Chapter 28.
Chapter 29.
Chapter 30.
Chapter 31.
Chapter 32.
Chapter 33.
Chapter 34.
Chapter 35.
Chapter 36.
Chapter 37.
Chapter 38.
Chapter 39.
Chapter 40.
Chapter 41.
Chapter 42.
Chapter 43.
Chapter 44.
Chapter 45.
Chapter 46.
Chapter 47.
PART FOUR
Chapter 48.
Chapter 49.
Chapter 50.
Chapter 51.
AFTERWORD
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
POSTSCRIPT BY KHALED HOSSEINI
READING GUIDE
A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR



PART ONE


1.
Mariam was five years old the first time she heard the word harami. It happened on a Thursday. It must have, because Mariam remembered that she felt restless and busy that day, like she did only on Thursdays, the day when Jalil visited her at the kolba, the small house. To make the time pass until she would finally see him, walking across the grass and waving, Mariam had climbed onto a chair and taken down her mother’s Chinese tea set. The tea set was the only thing Mariam’s mother, Nana, had from her own mother, who had died when Nana was two. Nana was very careful with each blue-and-white piece, the nice shape of the pot’s spout, the birds and flowers painted by hand, the dragon on the sugar bowl, which was supposed to keep bad things away. This last piece fell from Mariam’s fingers, landed on the wooden floor of the kolba, and broke into many pieces. When Nana saw the bowl, her face turned red and her upper lip shook a little, and her eyes, both the lazy one and the good one, looked at Mariam in a hard, fixed way. Nana looked so very angry that Mariam was afraid a bad spirit would enter her mother’s body again. But the spirit didn’t come that time. Instead, Nana took Mariam’s hands strongly, pulled her close, and, with her teeth pressed together, said, “You are a clumsy little harami. This is what I get for everything I’ve gone through. An old-thing-breaking, clumsy little harami.”

At the time, Mariam didn’t understand. She didn’t know what this word harami – bastard – meant. She was also not old enough to see that it was unfair, to see that the parents who make the harami are responsible, not the harami, whose only wrong thing is being born. Mariam did guess, from how Nana said the word, that it was an ugly, very unpleasant thing to be a harami, like an insect, like the quick cockroaches Nana was always saying bad things about and sweeping out of the kolba.

Later, when she was older, Mariam did understand. It was how Nana said the word – not just saying it but spitting it at her – that made Mariam feel how much it hurt. She understood then what Nana meant, that a harami was something nobody wanted; that she, Mariam, was a person without the right to have the things other people had, things like love, family, a home, being accepted. Jalil never called Mariam this name. Jalil said she was his little flower. He liked to have her sit on his knees and tell her stories, like the time he told her that Herat, the city where Mariam was born in 1959, had once been where Persian culture started, the home of writers, painters, and Sufis. “You couldn’t walk here without meeting a poet,” he laughed.

Jalil told her the story of Queen Gauhar Shad, who had built the famous towers as a sign of her love for Herat back in the 1400s. He described to her the green fields of wheat in Herat, the places where fruit trees grew, the plants full of big grapes, the city’s busy markets with curved roofs. “There is a pistachio tree,” Jalil said one day, “and under it, Mariam dear, the great poet Jami is buried.” He leaned in and whispered, “Jami lived over five hundred years ago. He did. I took you there once, to the tree. You were little. You wouldn’t remember.” It was true. Mariam didn’t remember. And though she would live the first fifteen years of her life close enough to walk to Herat, Mariam would never see this famous tree. She would never see the famous towers from near, and she would never pick fruit from Herat’s trees or walk in its fields of wheat. But whenever Jalil talked like this, Mariam would listen with great interest. She would admire Jalil because he knew so much about the world. She would shake a little with pride to have a father who knew such things.

“What rich lies!” Nana said after Jalil left. “A rich man telling rich lies. He never took you to any tree. And don’t let him charm you. He hurt us, your father you love so much. He sent us away. He sent us out of his big fancy house like we were nothing to him. He did it happily.” Mariam would listen quietly to this. She never dared tell Nana how much she didn’t like her talking this way about Jalil. The truth was that around Jalil, Mariam did not feel like a harami at all. For an hour or two every Thursday, when Jalil came to see her, smiling and bringing gifts and kind words, Mariam felt she deserved all the beauty and good things life could give. And, because of this, Mariam loved Jalil.

EVEN IF SHE had to share him.

Jalil had three wives and nine children, nine children who were born in marriage, all of whom Mariam didn't know. He was one of the richest men in Herat. He owned a cinema, which Mariam had never seen, but because she kept asking, Jalil had described it to her, and so she knew that the front was made of blue and brown tiles, that it had special seats on a higher level and a ceiling with a pattern of wood. Double doors that swung open led into a tiled area, where pictures from Indian films were shown in glass cases. On Tuesdays, Jalil said one day, kids got free ice cream at the place where they sold food and drinks. Nana smiled politely when he said this. She waited until he had left the kolba, before laughing quietly and saying, “The children of other people get ice cream. What do you get, Mariam? Stories about ice cream.”

Besides the cinema, Jalil owned land in Karokh, land in Farah, three shops selling carpets, a clothes shop, and a black car from 1956 called a Buick Roadmaster. He knew many important people in Herat, friends with the mayor and the head of the area. He had a cook, a driver, and three women who cleaned the house. Nana had been one of the women who cleaned. Until her stomach started to grow big.

When that happened, Nana said, Jalil’s family were so shocked they could hardly breathe. His wife’s families said blood would be spilled. The wives demanded that he send her away. Nana’s own father, who was a simple worker cutting stone in the nearby village of Gul Daman, said he was no longer her father. Ashamed, he packed his things and got on a bus to Iran, and was never seen or heard from again. “Sometimes,” Nana said early one morning, as she was giving food to the chickens outside the kolba, “I wish my father had been brave enough to make one of his knives sharp and do the right thing. It might have been better for me.” She threw another handful of seeds into the chicken house, stopped, and looked at Mariam. “Better for you too, maybe. It would have saved you the pain of knowing that you are what you are. But he was not brave, my father. He didn’t have the dil, the heart, for it.”

Jalil didn’t have the dil either, Nana said, to do the right thing. To stand up to his family, to his wives and their families, and say he was responsible for what he had done. Instead, secretly, an agreement to save face was quickly made. The next day, he made her gather her few things from the rooms where the workers lived, where she had been staying, and sent her away. “You know what he told his wives to defend himself? That I forced myself on him. That it was my fault. Didi? You see? This is what it means to be a woman in this world.” Nana put down the bowl of chicken food. She lifted Mariam’s chin with a finger.

“Look at me, Mariam.”

Mariam looked, not wanting to.

Nana said, “Learn this now and learn it well, my daughter: Like the needle on a compass that points north, a man’s finger blaming someone always finds a woman. Always. You remember that, Mariam.”



2.
To Jalil and his wives, I was a wild plant. A weed.
You too. And you weren’t even born yet.”

“What’s a weed?” Mariam asked.

“Something you pull out and throw away,” Nana said.

Mariam felt unhappy inside. Jalil didn’t treat her like a weed. Never. But Mariam thought it was best not to say this.

“Unlike weeds, I had to be put in the ground again, you see, given food and water. Because of you. That was the agreement Jalil made with his family.” Nana said she had refused to live in Herat.

“For what? To watch him drive his kinchini wives around town all day?” She said she wouldn’t live in her father’s empty house either, in the village of Gul Daman, which was on a high hill two kilometers north of Herat. She said she wanted to live somewhere far away, separate, where neighbors wouldn’t stare at her stomach, point at her, laugh quietly, or, even worse, be fake nice to her. “And, believe me,” Nana said, “your father was happy to have me out of his sight. It was fine for him.”

It was Muhsin, Jalil’s oldest son from his first wife, Khadija, who suggested the open area. It was outside Gul Daman. To get to it, you took a rough, sloping path made of earth that came off the main road between Herat and Gul Daman. The path had tall grass and small white and bright yellow flowers on both sides. The path went up the hill in curves and led to a flat area where tall trees grew and wild plants grew in groups. From up there, you could see the tops of the old, brown metal parts of Gul Daman’s windmill, on the left, and, on the right, all of Herat below. The path ended at a right angle to a wide stream full of trout fish, which came down from the Safid-koh mountains around Gul Daman. 200 yards up the stream, towards the mountains, there was a round group of trees with branches that hung down. In the middle, in the shade of the trees, was the open area. Jalil went there to see it. When he came back, Nana said, he sounded like a prison guard saying how clean his prison was. “And so, your father built us this small, poor house.”

NANA HAD ALMOST gotten married one time, when she was fifteen. The man who wanted to marry her was a boy from Shindand, a young man who sold small birds. Mariam knew the story from Nana herself, and, though Nana acted like it wasn’t important, Mariam could see from the sad but hopeful look in her eyes that she had been happy. Perhaps for the only time in her life, in the days before her wedding, Nana had been truly happy. As Nana told the story, Mariam sat on her knees and imagined her mother trying on a wedding dress. She imagined her riding a horse, smiling a little nervously behind a green dress that covered her face, her hands colored red with henna, her hair divided with silver powder, the hair ties made of sticky liquid from a tree. She saw people playing music with a shahnai flute and hitting dohol drums, kids in the street shouting and running after them. Then, a week before the wedding day, a bad spirit had entered Nana’s body. This didn’t need explaining to Mariam. She had seen it many times with her own eyes: Nana suddenly falling down, her body getting stiff and hard, her eyes rolling back, her arms and legs shaking as if something inside was squeezing her neck, the white foam at the sides of her mouth, sometimes pink with blood. Then feeling sleepy, feeling scared and confused, speaking in a way that didn't make sense. When the news got to Shindand, the parakeet seller’s family said the wedding would not happen.

“They got scared,” was how Nana said it.

The wedding dress was put away and hidden. After that, no other men wanted to marry her.

IN THE OPEN AREA, Jalil and two of his sons, Farhad and Muhsin, built the small kolba where Mariam would live for the first fifteen years of her life. They built it with bricks dried in the sun and covered it with mud mixed with straw. It had two simple beds, a wooden table, two chairs with straight backs, a window, and shelves fixed to the walls where Nana put clay pots and her beloved Chinese tea set. Jalil put in a new metal stove for the winter and piled up pieces of cut wood behind the kolba. He added a clay oven outside for making bread and a house for chickens with a fence around it. He brought a few sheep, built them a long container for food. He had Farhad and Muhsin dig a deep hole 100 yards outside the group of willow trees and built a toilet outside over it. Jalil could have paid workers to build the kolba, Nana said, but he didn’t. “His way of making up for something.”

IN NANA’S STORY about the day she gave birth to Mariam, no one came to help. It happened on a wet, cloudy day in the spring of 1959, she said, the twenty-sixth year that King Zahir Shah was king, who was king for 40 years and not much happened. She said that Jalil hadn’t tried to call a doctor, or even someone who helps with births, even though he knew that the bad spirit might enter her body and make her have one of her shaking attacks while she was having the baby. She was all alone on the floor of the kolba, a knife next to her, her body very wet with sweat. “When the pain was bad, I’d bite on a pillow and shout into it until my voice was rough. And still no one came to clean my face or give me something to drink. And you, Mariam dear, you were not fast. You made me stay on that cold, hard floor for almost two days. I didn’t eat or sleep, all I did was push and ask God to help you be born.”

“I’m sorry, Nana.”

“I cut the part that connected us myself. That’s why I had a knife.”

“I’m sorry.”

Nana always gave a slow smile that showed she felt heavy or sad, showing blame for a long time or forgiving but not really wanting to, Mariam could never tell which. It didn’t come to young Mariam’s mind to think it was unfair to say sorry for how she was born. By the time she did think about it, around when she was ten, Mariam no longer believed this story about her birth. She believed Jalil’s story, that even though he wasn’t there, he had made plans for Nana to be taken to a hospital in Herat where a doctor had taken care of her. She had been on a clean, proper bed in a room with good light. Jalil shook his head with sadness when Mariam told him about the knife. Mariam also started to doubt that she had made her mother suffer for two full days.

“They told me it was all finished in less than an hour,” Jalil said. “You were a good daughter, Mariam dear. Even when you were being born you were a good daughter.”

“He wasn’t even there!” Nana shouted. “He was in Takht-e-Safar, riding horses with his important friends.”

When they told him that he had a new daughter, Nana said, Jalil had lifted his shoulders, kept making his horse’s hair smooth, and stayed in Takht-e-Safar for another two weeks. “The truth is, he didn’t even pick you up until you were a month old. And then only to look down once, say something about your face being a bit long, and give you back to me.” Mariam also stopped believing this part of the story. Yes, Jalil said, he had been riding horses in Takht-e-Safar, but, when they gave him the news, he had not lifted his shoulders. He had quickly gotten on the horse and ridden back to Herat. He had moved her up and down gently in his arms, gently touched her dry eyebrows with his thumb, and sang a quiet song to help her sleep. Mariam didn’t imagine Jalil saying that her face was long, though it was true that it was long. Nana said she was the one who had chosen the name Mariam because it had been the name of her mother. Jalil said he chose the name because Mariam, a type of flower, was a lovely flower. “Your favorite?” Mariam asked.

“Well, one of my favorites,” he said and smiled.

3.
One of the first things Mariam remembered was the sound of a wheelbarrow’s metal wheels making a high sound as it went over stones. The wheelbarrow came once a month, full of rice, flour, tea, sugar, cooking oil, soap, toothpaste. It was pushed by two of Mariam’s brothers who had the same father but different mothers, usually Muhsin and Ramin, sometimes Ramin and Farhad. Up the path made of earth, over stones big and small, around holes and plants, the boys pushed one after the other until they reached the stream. There, they had to take everything out of the wheelbarrow and carry the things by hand across the water. Then the boys would move the wheelbarrow over the stream and put the things back in. They pushed for another 200 yards after that, this time through high, thick grass and around groups of small trees. Frogs jumped to get out of their way. The brothers moved their hands to get rid of the small flying insects from their faces which were wet with sweat.

“He has people who work for him,” Mariam said. “He could send a worker.”

“His way of making up for something,” Nana said.

The sound of the wheelbarrow made Mariam and Nana go outside. Mariam would always remember Nana the way she looked on the day they got food: a tall, thin woman without shoes standing in the door opening, her eye that didn't look straight almost closed, arms folded across her chest in a way that showed she was against something and making fun. Her short hair that the sun was shining on would not be covered and not brushed. She would wear a gray shirt that didn't fit well, buttoned all the way up. The pockets were full of stones as big as walnuts. The boys sat by the stream and waited as Mariam and Nana moved the food supplies to the kolba. They knew they should not come nearer than thirty yards, even though Nana was not good at throwing and most of the stones did not reach where she wanted them to go. Nana shouted at the boys as she carried bags of rice inside, and called them names Mariam didn’t understand. She said bad things about their mothers, made angry faces at them. The boys never said bad things back. Mariam felt sad for the boys. How tired their arms and legs must be, she thought sadly, pushing that heavy load. She wished she could give them water. But she said nothing, and if they waved at her she didn’t wave back. Once, to make Nana happy, Mariam even shouted at Muhsin, told him his mouth looked like a lizard’s bottom – and later felt very bad, embarrassed, and scared that they would tell Jalil. Nana, though, laughed so hard, showing her tooth that was not good, that Mariam thought she would start having one of her shaking attacks. She looked at Mariam after she finished and said, “You’re a good daughter.” When the wheelbarrow was empty, the boys moved back quickly and pushed it away. Mariam would wait and watch them go away into the high grass and wild plants with flowers. “Are you coming?”

“Yes, Nana.”

“They make fun of you. Yes, they do. I can hear them.”

“I’m coming.”

“You don’t believe me?”

“Here I am.”

“You know I love you, Mariam dear.”

IN THE MORNINGS, they woke up hearing the sheep far away making their sound and the sound of a flute played at a high note as the people who look after sheep in Gul Daman took their group of sheep to eat grass on the side of the hill. Mariam and Nana took milk from the goats, gave food to the female chickens, and collected eggs. They made bread together. Nana showed her how to mix and press the bread mix, how to start the fire in the clay oven and put the flat bread mix onto its inside walls quickly. Nana taught her to sew too, and to cook rice and all the different things to put on top: thick soup with turnip, cooked spinach, a white vegetable cooked with ginger. Nana didn't hide that she didn't like visitors – and, in fact, people in general – but she allowed a few special people to visit. And so there was the main person in Gul Daman, the village leader, Habib Khan, a man with a small head, a beard, and a large stomach who came by about once a month, followed by someone who worked for him, who carried a chicken, sometimes a pot of rice mixed with beans, or a basket of colored eggs, for Mariam. Then there was a round, old woman that Nana called Bibi jo, whose husband who had died had been a stone worker and friends with Nana’s father. Bibi jo always came with one of her six daughters-in-law and one or two grandchildren. She walked with a limp and breathed heavily across the open area and made a big show of rubbing her hip and sitting down, with a sound of pain, onto the chair that Nana pulled up for her. Bibi jo too always brought Mariam something, a box of sweet candy, a basket of fruits called quinces. For Nana, she first complained about her health which was getting worse, and then shared gossip from Herat and Gul Daman, told for a long time and with energy, while her daughter-in-law sat listening quietly and doing what she was told behind her.

But Mariam’s favorite, apart from Jalil of course, was Mullah Faizullah, the old village teacher of the Koran, the religious teacher. He came by once or twice a week from Gul Daman to teach Mariam the five daily prayers and teach her how to read the Koran aloud, just as he had taught Nana when she had been a little girl. It was Mullah Faizullah who had taught Mariam to read, who had calmly looked over her shoulder as she moved her lips to say the words without making a sound, her first finger staying under each word, pushing until the part under her fingernail turned white, as if she could get the meaning from the letters by pushing. It was Mullah Faizullah who had held her hand, moved the pencil in it to draw the shapes of Arabic letters. He was a very thin, old man who bent forward when he walked, with a smile without teeth and a white beard that went down to his belly button. Usually, he came alone to the kolba, though sometimes with his son Hamza who had reddish-brown hair, who was a few years older than Mariam. When he arrived at the kolba, Mariam kissed Mullah Faizullah’s hand – which felt like kissing thin pieces of wood covered with a little skin – and he kissed her forehead before they sat inside for the teaching of the day. After, the two of them sat outside the kolba, ate small nuts from pine trees and drank green tea slowly, looked at the bulbul birds flying quickly from tree to tree. Sometimes they walked among the brown leaves that had fallen and the alder plants, along the stream and towards the mountains. Mullah Faizullah turned the beads of his prayer beads while they walked slowly, and, in his voice that shook a little, told Mariam stories of all the things he had seen when he was young, like the snake with two heads he had found in Iran, on a bridge in Isfahan, or the watermelon he had cut open one time near a mosque in Mazar, and saw that the seeds made the words Allah on one side and Akbar on the other. Mullah Faizullah told Mariam that, sometimes, he didn't understand what the words in the Koran meant. But he said he liked the beautiful sounds the Arabic words made when he said them. He said they made him feel better, made his heart feel lighter. “They will make you feel better too, Mariam dear,” he said. “You can ask them to help you when you need it, and they will not fail you. God’s words will never hurt you, my girl.”

Mullah Faizullah was good at listening to stories as well as telling them. When Mariam talked, he always listened carefully. He moved his head up and down slowly and smiled like he was thankful, as if someone had given him something special that many people wanted. It was easy to tell Mullah Faizullah things that Mariam was too scared to tell Nana. One day, as they were walking, Mariam told him that she wished she could go to school.

“I mean a real school, religious teacher. Like in a room for teaching. Like my father’s other kids.”

Mullah Faizullah stopped.

The week before, Bibi jo had shared the information that Jalil’s daughters Saideh and Naheed were attending a school for girls in Herat. Since then, ideas about schoolrooms and teachers were in Mariam's mind, pictures of books with lines, lists of numbers, and pens that wrote with strong, dark lines. She imagined herself in a schoolroom with girls who were the same age. Mariam really wanted to put a ruler on a page and draw lines that looked important.

“Is that what you want?” Mullah Faizullah said, looking at her with his kind eyes that seemed a little wet, his hands behind his back that was bent forward, the dark shape of his head covering falling on a small area of stiff yellow flowers.

“Yes.”

“And you want me to ask your mother for permission.”

Mariam smiled. Apart from Jalil, she thought no one in the world knew her feelings better than her old teacher.

“Then what can I do? God, who is wise, has given each of us things we are not good at, and the most important of the many things I am not good at is that I cannot say no to you, Mariam dear,” he said, gently touching her face with a finger that was stiff from old age.

But later, when he spoke to Nana about it, she let the knife fall that she was using to cut onions. “What for?”

“If the girl wants to study, let her, my friend. Let the girl go to school.”

“Study? Study what, religious teacher?” Nana said in a sudden, strong way. “What is there to study?” She quickly moved her eyes to look at Mariam.

Mariam looked down at her hands.

“What is the point of sending a girl like you to school? It’s like trying to make a pot for spitting clean and shiny. And you won’t learn anything important in those schools. There is only one, just one thing a woman like you and me needs to be able to do in life, and they don’t teach it in school. Look at me.”

“You should not talk like this to her, my dear,” Mullah Faizullah said.

“Look at me.”

Mariam did.

“Only one thing you need to be able to do. And it’s this: tahamul. Be strong and deal with difficult things.”

“Deal with what, Nana?”

“Oh, don’t worry about that,” Nana said. “There will be many things you will have to deal with.” She continued to talk about how Jalil’s wives had said she was ugly and the daughter of a simple stone worker. How they had made her wash clothes outside in the cold weather until she couldn't feel her face and the ends of her fingers hurt a lot. “This is our destiny, Mariam. Women like us. We are strong and deal with things. It is the only thing we have. Do you understand? Also, people will make fun of you at school. Yes, they will. They’ll call you harami. They’ll say very bad things about you. I will not allow it.”

Mariam nodded.

“And don't speak about school anymore. You are the only person I have. I will not let them take you away from me. Look at me. Don't speak about school anymore.”

“Be sensible. Please. If the girl wants—” Mullah Faizullah began.

“And you, religious teacher, I mean no disrespect, but you should know not to support these silly ideas she has. If you truly care for her, then you help her understand that she should be here at home with her mother. There is nothing good for her outside of here. Only people saying no to her and feeling very sad. I know, religious teacher. I know.”



4.
Mariam liked it very much when people came to visit the kolba, the small house. The village leader and the presents he brought, Bibi jo with her painful hip and talking about other people all the time, and, of course, Mullah Faizullah. But there was no one, nobody, that Mariam wanted to see more than Jalil. She started feeling worried on Tuesday evenings. Mariam would not sleep well, worrying that some problem with his work would stop Jalil from coming on Thursday, that she would have to wait for another seven days to see him. On Wednesdays, she walked back and forth outside, near the kolba, threw food for the chickens into their house without really thinking about it. She walked without a specific plan, picking off the soft parts of flowers and hitting the small flying insects that were biting her arms. In the end, on Thursdays, the only thing she could do was sit by a wall, looking fixedly at the stream, and wait. If Jalil was coming later than usual, a very bad fear slowly filled her. Her legs would feel weak, and she would need to go and rest somewhere. Then Nana would shout, “And there he is, your father. Looking very important.”

Mariam would jump up quickly when she saw him jumping on stones to cross the stream, smiling a lot and waving in a friendly, strong way. Mariam knew that Nana was looking at her, checking how she reacted, and it was always hard to stay in the door opening, to wait, to watch him come slowly towards her, to not run to him. She controlled herself, waited and watched him walk through the high grass without getting annoyed, his suit jacket hanging over his shoulder, the wind making his red tie move up. When Jalil came into the open area, he would put his jacket on the clay oven in a quick way and spread his arms wide. Mariam would walk, then finally run, to him, and he would take her under her arms and throw her up into the air. Mariam would make a high, happy sound. Held in the air, Mariam would see Jalil’s face looking up at her from below, his big smile that wasn't straight, the point of hair on his forehead, the split in his chin – a good place for the end of her smallest finger – his teeth, which were the most white in a town where people had bad back teeth. She liked his mustache that was cut neatly, and she liked that in any weather he wore a suit when he visited – dark brown, his best color, with a white handkerchief in the top pocket – and things to hold his shirt cuffs together too, and a tie, often red, which he didn't tie tightly. Mariam could see herself too, in Jalil's brown eyes, like in a mirror: her hair moving in the wind, her face showing great excitement, the sky behind her. Nana said that one day he would not catch her, that she would fall from his hands, land on the ground, and break a bone. But Mariam didn't think Jalil would let her fall. She believed that she would always land without getting hurt into her father’s clean hands with neat fingernails.

They sat outside the kolba, in the shade, and Nana gave them tea. Jalil and she showed they saw each other with a smile that wasn't comfortable and by moving their heads. Jalil never spoke about Nana throwing stones or saying bad words. Even though she spoke angrily about him when he was not there, Nana was quiet and polite when Jalil came. Her hair was always clean. She brushed her teeth, wore her nicest head covering for him. She sat quietly on a chair opposite him, her hands together on her knees. She did not look straight into his eyes and never used rude words when he was there. When she laughed, she put her closed hand over her mouth so he wouldn't see the tooth that was not good. Nana asked about his work and shops. And also about the women he was married to. When she said she had heard, from Bibi jo, that his youngest wife, Nargis, was going to have her third baby, Jalil smiled politely and moved his head up and down. “Well. You must be happy,” Nana said. “How many children do you have now? Ten, is that right, God has blessed you? Ten?” Jalil said yes, ten. “Eleven, if you include Mariam, of course.”

Later, after Jalil left, Mariam and Nana argued a little about this. Mariam said she had played a trick on him.

After drinking tea with Nana, Mariam and Jalil always went to catch fish in the stream. He showed her how to throw the fishing line into the water, how to pull the fish back in. He taught her the correct way to take the insides out of a trout fish, to clean it, to take the fish meat away from the bone in one movement. He drew pictures for her while they waited for a fish to bite the hook, showed her how to draw an elephant with one continuous line without taking the pen off the paper. He taught her short songs with words that sound similar at the end. Together they sang:

Lili lili birdbath,
Sitting on a dirt path,
Minnow sat on the rim and drank,
Slipped, and in the water she sank.

Jalil brought pieces of paper cut from Herat’s newspaper and read from them to her. He was Mariam's connection, showing her that there was a big world outside the small house, outside Gul Daman and Herat too, a world with leaders whose names were hard to say, and ways to travel, places to see old things, and a sport, and machines that went around the Earth and landed on the moon, and, every Thursday, Jalil brought a little bit of that big world with him to the kolba. He was the person who told her in the summer of 1973, when Mariam was 14, that King Zahir Shah, who had been king in Kabul for 40 years, had been removed from power in a change that didn't involve fighting. “His cousin Daoud Khan did it while the king was in Italy because he was sick. You remember Daoud Khan, right? I told you about him. He was the main minister in Kabul when you were born. In any case, Afghanistan is not ruled by a king anymore, Mariam. You see, it is a country ruled by the people now, and Daoud Khan is the leader. People are saying that the socialists in Kabul helped him become leader. Not that he is a socialist himself, just so you know, but that they gave him help. That's what people are saying anyway.”

Mariam asked him what the word socialist meant and Jalil started to tell her, but Mariam almost didn't listen. “Are you listening?”

“I am.”

He saw she was looking at the round shape in the side pocket of his coat. “Oh. Yes. Okay. Here it is. Without waiting any longer . . .”

He took a small box out of his pocket and gave it to her. He did this sometimes, brought her little gifts. A wide red stone bracelet one time, a necklace that fits closely around the neck with blue stones another time. That day, Mariam opened the box and found a decoration shaped like a leaf, with small coins hanging from it that had pictures of moons and stars cut into them. “Put it on, Mariam dear.”

She put it on. “How does it look?”

Jalil smiled very happily. “I think you look like a queen.”

After he left, Nana saw the decoration around Mariam’s neck. “Jewelry made by people who travel from place to place,” she said. “I have seen them making it. They make the metal coins that people throw at them hot and make jewelry. Let’s see if he brings you gold the next time, your father who you love so much. Let’s see if he does it.”

When it was the moment for Jalil to go, Mariam always stood in the door opening and watched him leave the open area, feeling sad and less hopeful thinking about the seven days that were like a very big thing that couldn't be moved, separating her from the next time he would visit. Mariam always stopped breathing while she watched him walk away. She stopped breathing and, in her mind, counted the time in seconds. She pretended that for every second she didn't breathe, God would give her one more day with Jalil. At night, Mariam lay in her simple bed and thought about what his house in Herat was like. She thought about how it would feel to live with him, to see him daily. She imagined herself giving him a towel while he was cutting his beard, telling him when he cut himself a little. She would make tea for him. She would sew back the buttons that had fallen off his clothes. They would walk together in Herat, in the market with curved roofs where Jalil said you could buy anything you wished for. They would travel in his car, and people would show them with their fingers and say, “Look, there is Jalil Khan with his daughter.” He would show her the famous tree with a poet buried under it. One day soon, Mariam decided, she would tell Jalil these ideas. And when he listened, when he understood how much she felt sad when he was away, he would surely take her to live with him. He would bring her to Herat, to live in his house, the same way his other children did.

5.
“I know what I wish for,” Mariam said to Jalil. It was springtime in 1974, the year Mariam became 15 years old. The three of them were sitting outside the kolba, in a place where the willow trees made a shadow, on chairs that could be folded, placed in a shape with three points. “For my birthday . . . I know what I wish for.”

“You do?” said Jalil, smiling in a way that gave her hope.

Two weeks earlier, because Mariam kept asking, Jalil had mentioned that a film from America was being shown at his movie theatre. It was a different type of film, what he had called a cartoon. He said the whole film was many drawings, thousands of them, so when they were made into a film and shown on a big white surface, it looked like the drawings were moving. Jalil said the film told the story of an old man who made toys, who had no children, who felt alone and really, really wanted a son. So he makes a puppet, a boy, from wood, and it becomes alive in a special way. Mariam had asked him to say more about it, and Jalil said that the old man and his puppet had many different exciting experiences, that there was a place named Pleasure Island, and boys who behaved badly who changed into donkeys. They even went inside a big fish called a whale at the end, the puppet and the old man who was like his father. Mariam had told Mullah Faizullah everything about this film.

“I want you to bring me to your movie theatre,” Mariam said now. “I want to watch the moving drawings. I want to see the boy made of wood.”

When she said this, Mariam felt that the feeling in the air changed. Her parents moved a little in their chairs. Mariam could feel that they were looking at each other. “That is not a good plan,” said Nana. Her voice was quiet, it sounded careful and polite like she spoke when Jalil was there, but Mariam could feel her strong, angry look. Jalil moved in his chair. He made a sound in his throat.

“You know,” he said, “the picture is not very clear. The sound is not good either. And the machine that shows the film has not been working well lately. Perhaps your mother is correct. Maybe you can think of a different gift, Mariam dear.”

“Aneh,” Nana said. “You see? Your father thinks the same.”

BUT LATER, by the stream, Mariam said, “Bring me.”

“I will tell you what I will do,” Jalil said. “I will send a person to get you and bring you there. I will make sure they find you a good place to sit and give you all the sweet food you wish for.”

“No. I want you to bring me yourself.”

“Mariam dear—”

“And I want you to ask my brothers and sisters to come too. I want to see them for the first time. I want all of us to go, as a group. This is what I wish for.”

Jalil made a long sound showing he was tired or sad. He was looking in a different direction, towards the mountains. Mariam remembered him saying that on the big white surface, a person's face looked as large as a house, that when a car hit something on the screen, you felt the metal bending in your body. She imagined herself sitting in the special higher seats, eating ice cream slowly, next to her brothers and sisters and Jalil. “This is what I wish for,” she said.

Jalil looked at her with a sad face. “Tomorrow. At 12 o'clock in the middle of the day. I will see you in this exact place. Okay? The next day?”

“Come closer,” he said. He bent his knees and lowered himself, brought her close to his body, and kept her in his arms for a very extended period.

AT THE BEGINNING, Nana walked back and forth around the kolba, closing and opening her hands into tight balls. “From all the daughters I might have had, why did God give me one who doesn't thank me for anything, like you?”Mariam's mother was very angry. She shouted, "I did so much for you! How could you! How could you leave me like this!" Then she laughed and said, "You are a silly girl! You think he wants you? You think you are like a daughter to him? No! A man's heart is not kind like a mother's. It won't make space for you. Only I love you. I am all you have. When I am gone, you will have nothing. You are nothing!" Then she tried to make Mariam feel bad. She said, "I will die if you go. A bad spirit will come, and I will get sick. You will see, I will die. Please stay." Mariam did not speak. Her mother said, "You know I love you." Mariam said she was going for a walk.

Mariam was afraid she would say mean things, like she knew the spirit story wasn't true, and that Jalil said her mother had a sickness that medicine could help. She wanted to ask why her mother didn't see doctors or take the pills. She felt tired of being used and lied to. She felt her mother made her another reason to be angry at the world. Mariam thought, 'You are scared, Mother. You are scared I might be happy, and you don't want that. You are the one with a bad heart.'

Mariam went to a place where she liked to look out. She sat on the grass. She could see the city of Herat below, like a child's game. She saw parks, markets, old buildings, and tall towers far away. She saw birds flying and wished she could fly to Herat like them. She picked up ten small stones. She put them in lines, four for Khadija's children, three for Afsoon's, and three for Nargis's. Then she added one more stone, the eleventh, for herself.

The next morning, Mariam wore a cream dress, white trousers, and a green headscarf. She wasn't sure about the green headscarf, but her white one had holes. She looked at the clock, a gift from her teacher, Mullah Faizullah. It was nine o'clock. She wondered where her mother was. She didn't want to look for her because she knew her mother would be angry and say she was not loyal. Mariam sat and drew an elephant many times, like Jalil showed her. She sat for a long time and felt stiff. She didn't lie down because she didn't want to wrinkle her dress. At eleven-thirty, she took the eleven stones and went outside. On the way to the stream, she saw her mother sitting under a tree. Mariam didn't know if her mother saw her. Mariam waited by the stream where they had planned to meet. She saw grey clouds in the sky. Time passed.

Mariam went back to her home (kolba), walking a different way to avoid her mother. She checked the clock again. It was almost one o'clock. She thought, 'He is a busy man. Something came up.' She went back to the stream and waited longer. She watched birds and an insect. She waited until her legs felt stiff. This time, she did not go back home. She pulled up her trousers, walked across the stream, and went down the hill to Herat for the first time in her life.

Her mother was wrong about Herat. No one pointed or laughed. Mariam walked on busy streets with people, bikes, and carts. No one threw stones or called her names. She felt like a normal person, which was wonderful. She stood by a pool in a park. She touched stone horses and watched boys with paper boats. She saw many beautiful flowers. People were walking or sitting and drinking tea. Mariam was very excited. She wished Mullah Faizullah could see her. She thought about the new life she would have with her father and sisters, a life with love. She walked back to a main road. She saw old sellers with fruit and boys selling fruit. Mariam stood on a corner and watched people, wondering why they didn't seem amazed by the city.

After a while, she was brave enough to ask an old man with a horse cart if he knew where Jalil, the cinema owner, lived. The man was friendly and said everyone knew. Mariam asked him to show her. He offered her a sweet and asked if she was alone. She said yes. He said he would take her. Mariam said she had no money. He gave her the sweet and said he was going home anyway and Jalil's house was on his way. Mariam got on the cart. They rode without talking. She saw shops and people. The old man stopped the cart on a street with trees. He pointed and said, "There. That's his car." Mariam got off. The man smiled and left.

Mariam had never touched a car. She touched Jalil's black, shiny car. She saw herself in the wheels. She saw the white seats. For a moment, she heard her mother's voice in her head, making her hopes feel weak. Mariam's legs were shaking as she walked to the front door. She touched the tall walls of the house, which felt scary. She looked up high to see the tops of trees over the wall. She thought the trees were welcoming her. Mariam tried to feel strong.

A young woman with a mark under her lip opened the door. Mariam said she was Mariam, Jalil Khan's daughter. The girl looked confused, then she seemed to understand. She smiled a little and looked like she was waiting for something. The girl quickly said, "Wait here," and closed the door. A few minutes later, a man opened the door. He was tall and strong. He said he was Jalil Khan's driver. Mariam asked, "His what?" He said, "His driver." He said Jalil Khan was not there. Mariam said she saw his car. He said Jalil was away on important business. Mariam asked when he would be back. He said Jalil didn't say. Mariam said she would wait. He closed the gates.

Mariam sat and held her knees. It was getting dark, and she was hungry. She ate the sweet. Later, the driver came out again. He said she needed to go home because it would be dark soon. Mariam said she was used to the dark. He offered to drive her home and tell Jalil she was there. Mariam just looked at him. He offered to take her to a hotel. Mariam said, "Let me in the house." He said he was told not to, and no one knew when Jalil would be back. Mariam crossed her arms. The driver sighed. Mariam would often think later about what might have happened if she had gone home with the driver. But she stayed outside Jalil's house all night.

She watched the sky get dark. The girl brought her bread and rice, but Mariam said she didn't want it. The girl left the food. Mariam heard people and dogs. Lights came on in houses. When she was too hungry, Mariam ate the food. In the morning, the driver woke her up. Someone had covered her with a blanket. The driver said, "This is enough. You have made a problem. It's time to go." Mariam sat up. Her back and neck hurt. She said, "I am going to wait for him." The driver said, "Look. Jalil Khan says I must take you back now. Right now. Do you understand? Jalil Khan says so." He opened the car door and said softly, "Come on." Mariam said, "I want to see him." She started to cry. The driver sighed and said, "Let me take you home. Come on, dear girl." Mariam stood up and walked towards him. But then she quickly turned and ran to the gates. She felt the driver try to grab her. She got away and ran through the open gates.

For a few seconds in the garden, Mariam saw a building with glass, plants, grapevines, a pond, fruit trees, and flowers. Her eyes quickly looked at these things until she saw a face in a window upstairs. She saw the face for just a moment, but it was enough. She saw the eyes get wide and the mouth open. Then the face quickly disappeared. A hand pulled the curtains shut. Then two hands grabbed her and lifted her up. Mariam kicked. The stones fell from her pocket. Mariam kept kicking and crying as they carried her to the car and put her on the cold back seat.

The driver talked quietly as he drove. Mariam did not hear him. She cried the whole time. She cried because she was sad, angry, and disappointed. But mostly she cried because she felt very ashamed that she believed in Jalil so much. She was ashamed that she worried about her dress, walked there, refused to leave, and slept outside like a stray dog. She was also ashamed that she ignored her mother, who had warned her and was right. Mariam kept thinking about Jalil's face in the window. He let her sleep on the street. Mariam cried lying down. She imagined everyone in Herat knew she had made a fool of herself. She wished Mullah Faizullah was there. After a while, the road went uphill. They were on the road back home.

Mariam wondered what she would say to her mother. How could she say sorry? How could she face her? The car stopped, and the driver helped her out. He said he would walk with her. She let him guide her across the road and up the path. There were plants and flowers. The driver took her hand and helped her cross the stream. Then he let go and talked about the strong winds and insects. Suddenly, he stood in front of her, trying to cover her eyes and push her back. He said, "Go back! Don't look!" But he was not quick enough. Mariam saw. The wind blew and moved the tree branches like a curtain, and Mariam saw what was under the tree: the chair was on its side. A rope hung from a branch. Her mother was hanging at the end of the rope.

They buried her mother in the cemetery. Mariam stood with the women as Mullah Faizullah said prayers and the men put her mother's body in the ground. Afterwards, Jalil walked Mariam back to her home. In front of the villagers, he acted like he cared a lot. He put some of her things in a suitcase. He sat by her bed and fanned her face. He touched her forehead and looked sad, asking if she needed anything. Mariam said, "I want Mullah Faizullah." Jalil said he would get him. When Mullah Faizullah came to the door, Mariam cried. He sat next to her and held her face. He told her to cry, that it was okay. He told her to remember that God tests people and has a reason for sadness. But Mariam could not feel comfort. All she could hear was her mother saying, "I will die if you go." She just cried and cried onto Mullah Faizullah's hands.

On the way to his house, Jalil sat with Mariam in the car, his arm around her. He said she could stay with him and that they had cleaned a room for her upstairs with a view of the garden. For the first time, Mariam heard him the way her mother would have heard him. She heard that he was not really sincere, that his words felt empty, like her mother always said. She could not look at him. When the car stopped, the driver opened the door and carried her suitcase. Jalil put his hands on her shoulders and guided her through the same gates where she had slept outside two days before. It felt like a very long time ago. Mariam wondered how her life changed so fast. She looked at her feet as she walked in the garden. She knew people were watching her from the windows upstairs.

Inside the house, she kept her head down. She walked on a red carpet. She saw parts of statues and decorations. They went up wide stairs. At the top, Jalil took her to a room. He said his daughters sometimes played there, but it was mostly a guest room. He thought she would be comfortable. The room had a bed with a green blanket and curtains that showed the garden. There was a small table with flowers and shelves with pictures of people she didn't know. On one shelf, she saw wooden dolls, small inside bigger ones. Jalil said they were Russian dolls he got in another country and she could play with them. Mariam sat on the bed. Jalil asked if she wanted anything. Mariam lay down and closed her eyes. She heard him softly close the door.

Mariam stayed in the room most of the time, except to use the bathroom. The girl with the tattoo brought her food, but Mariam didn't eat much. Jalil came many times each day and sat on the bed, asking if she was okay. He suggested she eat downstairs, but he didn't seem to really want her to. He understood easily when she said she wanted to eat alone. From the window, Mariam watched Jalil's life, which she had wanted to see for so long. Servants came and went. A gardener worked. Cars arrived, and important people got out. As Mariam watched Jalil meet these people, she knew her mother was right. She did not belong here. She wondered where she did belong and what she would do. She remembered her mother saying, "I am all you have... You are nothing!" Mariam felt waves of sadness.

On her second full day there, a little girl came into the room. She said she needed to get something. Mariam sat up. The girl went to the closet and got a grey box. She said it was a gramophone for music. Mariam said, "You are Niloufar. You are eight." The girl smiled. She looked like Jalil. She asked how Mariam knew. Mariam didn't say she once named a stone after her. Niloufar asked if she wanted to hear a song. Mariam didn't answer clearly. Niloufar played a song from a movie. She asked if Mariam knew it. Mariam said no. Niloufar asked if Mariam wanted to see something. Before Mariam could answer, Niloufar stood on her head. She asked if Mariam could do it. Mariam said no. Niloufar said she could teach her. She asked how long Mariam would stay. Mariam said she didn't know. Niloufar said her mother says Mariam is not really her sister. Mariam lied and said she never said she was. Niloufar said her mother said she did, but she didn't mind. Mariam lay down and said she was tired. Niloufar said her mother says a bad spirit made Mariam's mother hang herself. Mariam told her to stop talking and turn off the music.

Bibi jo visited that day too. It was raining. Bibi jo sat on the chair and said the rain hurt her hips. She told Mariam to come to her and not cry, calling her a "poor thing." That night, Mariam couldn't sleep for a long time. She heard sounds downstairs. She woke up suddenly because of loud, angry voices downstairs. She couldn't understand the words. Someone slammed a door. The next morning, Mullah Faizullah came to visit. Mariam was happy to see him and felt like crying again. She got out of bed and went to him. She kissed his hand, and he kissed her forehead. She got him a chair. He showed her the holy book and said they should keep their old routine. Mariam said she didn't need lessons because he taught her everything years ago. He smiled and said he just wanted an excuse to visit. Mariam said he didn't need an excuse. He said she was kind. He gave her the holy book. She kissed it three times like he taught her. He asked how she was. Mariam started to say she keeps thinking about what her mother said before she left. It was hard for her to speak. Mullah Faizullah stopped her. He said her mother was sad and unhappy. He said her mother did a terrible thing to herself and to God. He said God would forgive her, but God was sad because taking a life is wrong. He said he knew her mother when she was young and she was unhappy then. He said what happened was not Mariam's fault. He told her to stop thinking that way because it would hurt her. Mariam nodded, but she could not believe him.

One afternoon a week later, a tall woman came into the room. She had light skin and red hair. She said she was Afsoon, Niloufar's mother. She told Mariam to get ready and come downstairs because they needed to talk to her about something important. Mariam said she wanted to stay in her room. Afsoon said no, she didn't understand, she must come down.

They sat across from Mariam, Jalil and his wives, at a long, dark table. There were flowers and water on the table. Afsoon sat next to Jalil. Khadija and Nargis sat on his other side. The wives wore thin black scarves around their necks. They asked if Mariam had been comfortable and said this time must be very hard for her. Mariam saw their shaped eyebrows and polite smiles. She felt strange and her throat hurt. She drank water. She saw trees outside the window and a photo of Jalil and three boys with a fish. Jalil and the boys were smiling. Afsoon said they had good news for Mariam. Mariam looked up. She saw the wives look at each other over Jalil, who was looking down. Khadija, the oldest wife, looked at Mariam. She said, "You have someone who wants to marry you." (a suitor)

Mariam felt sick. She asked, "A what?" Khadija explained it was a suitor named Rasheed. He was a friend of someone Jalil knows. He was from Kandahar but lived in Kabul in his own house. Afsoon added that he spoke their language. Mariam felt tight inside, and the room seemed to move. Khadija said he was a shoemaker, a good one with his own shop, making shoes for important people. She said he would be able to take care of Mariam. Mariam looked at Jalil, her heart beating fast. "Is this true?" But Jalil did not look at her. He kept looking down. Afsoon said he was a little older, maybe 40 or 45. Nargis said yes, but many girls marry older men. She said Mariam was 15, which was a good age to marry. The others agreed. Mariam noticed they didn't mention her sisters, who were her age but were still students. Nargis said Rasheed had also had sadness in his life; his wife died giving birth, and his son drowned. Someone said it was sad and he had been looking for a wife.

Mariam said, "I don't want to." She looked at Jalil. "I don't want this. Don't make me." She hated that she sounded like she was begging. One of the wives said, "Now, be sensible, Mariam." Mariam didn't know who was speaking anymore. She kept looking at Jalil, hoping he would say it was not true. They said she couldn't stay here forever. They asked if she didn't want her own family, a home, children. They said she had to move on. They said it would be better if she married someone from their own group, but Rasheed was healthy and interested, had a home and a job. They said Kabul was a nice city and she might not get another good chance. Mariam turned to the wives. She said she would live with Mullah Faizullah. Khadija said that was not good. She said he was old and... She paused, and Mariam knew she wanted to say he was too close. Mariam understood what they were doing. This was their chance to get rid of her, the reminder of Jalil's mistake. They were sending her away because she made them feel ashamed. Khadija finally said Mullah Faizullah was old and weak and Mariam would be a problem for his family. Mariam thought they meant she was a problem for *them* now.

Mariam pictured herself in Kabul, a big, strange city far away. She pictured living in a stranger's house, having to do what he wants, cleaning, cooking. She also thought about other things husbands do to wives, which her mother had told her about. She imagined these things were painful and felt very scared. She turned to Jalil again. "Tell them. Tell them you won't let them do this." Afsoon said Jalil had already said yes to Rasheed. She said Rasheed was here, and the wedding would be tomorrow morning, and a bus to Kabul left at noon. "Tell them!" Mariam shouted. The wives became quiet. Mariam felt they were watching Jalil too, waiting. It became silent. Jalil kept turning his wedding ring, looking sad and helpless. The clock ticked. One of the wives said, "Jalil dear?" Jalil slowly looked up, looked at Mariam, then looked down. He opened his mouth but only made a sound like he was in pain. "Say something," Mariam said. Then Jalil spoke in a weak voice. "Goddamn it, Mariam, don't do this to me," he said, as if she was hurting him. With that, Mariam felt the tight feeling in the room go away. Jalil's wives started to talk again, trying to make Mariam feel better. Mariam looked down at the table. She looked at its shiny surface. She noticed that when she breathed out, the surface got foggy, and she could not see herself at her father's table. Afsoon took her back to the room upstairs. When Afsoon closed the door, Mariam heard a key turn in the lock.

In the morning, Mariam was given a dark green dress, white trousers, a green headscarf, and green sandals. She was taken to the room with the brown table. There was candy, a holy book, a green cloth (veil), and a mirror on the table. Two men she didn't know (witnesses) and a religious man (mullah) were there. Jalil showed her to a chair. He wore a suit and tie. He tried to smile to encourage her. Khadija and Afsoon sat on Mariam's side. The mullah pointed to the veil, and Nargis put it on Mariam's head. Mariam looked at her hands. Jalil told someone to bring the man in. Mariam smelled him before she saw him. Cigarette smoke and strong perfume. Through the veil, she saw a tall, fat man with wide shoulders. His size surprised her, and her heart beat fast. She had to look down. She felt him walk slowly across the room. He made a noise and sat next to her. He breathed loudly.

The mullah welcomed them. He said it would be a quick wedding because Rasheed had a bus ticket. He said some prayers and talked about marriage. He asked Jalil if he had any problems. Jalil shook his head no. Then the mullah asked Rasheed if he wanted to marry Mariam. Rasheed said, "Yes." His voice was rough. The mullah asked, "And do you, Mariam dear, accept this man as your husband?" Mariam was quiet. People coughed. A woman's voice said, "She does." The mullah said Mariam must answer herself and wait until he asks three times. He asked two more times. Mariam didn't answer. He asked again, more strongly. Mariam felt Jalil moving next to her. More coughing. A hand brushed dust off the table. "Mariam," Jalil whispered. "Yes," she said, her voice shaky.

A mirror was passed under the veil. In it, Mariam saw her own face first. She saw her eyebrows, her hair, her eyes that were close together. Her skin was not smooth. She thought her face looked long and like a dog's face. But she also saw that, strangely, her face was not pretty but not bad to look at either. In the mirror, Mariam saw Rasheed: his big, red face; his bent nose; his red cheeks that made him look sneaky; his wet, red eyes; his teeth that were close together; his hair that started very low; his thick, grey and black hair. Their eyes met for a moment in the mirror, then looked away. 'This is the face of my husband,' Mariam thought. They exchanged thin gold rings. Rasheed took his from his pocket. His fingernails were yellow-brown. Mariam's hands shook when she tried to put the ring on his finger, and Rasheed had to help her. Her own ring was a little tight, but Rasheed easily pushed it on. "There," he said. One of the wives said the ring was pretty. The mullah said they just needed to sign the paper. Mariam signed her name, thinking about everyone watching her hand. The next time she signed her name on a paper would be 27 years later, and a mullah would be there again. The mullah said, "You are now husband and wife. Congratulations."

Rasheed waited on the bus. Mariam couldn't see him from where she stood with Jalil, near the back of the bus, only the smoke from his cigarette. Around them, people were saying good-bye. Jalil was busy telling her how beautiful Kabul was. Mariam knew he would keep talking about the city, and soon she would be on the bus, and he would walk next to it, waving happily, safe. Mariam could not let this happen. "I used to look up to you so much," she said. Jalil stopped talking. He moved his arms. A couple walked between them. Jalil seemed happy for the stop. He smiled politely. "On Thursdays, I waited for hours for you. I was so worried you wouldn't come." He said it was a long trip and she should eat something. He offered to buy her food. "I thought about you all the time. I used to pray you would live to be a hundred. I didn't know you were embarrassed by me." Jalil looked down and kicked the ground. "You were embarrassed by me." "I will visit you," he said quietly. "I will come to Kabul and see you." "No. No," she said. "Don't come. I won't see you. Don't you come. I don't want to hear from you. Ever." He looked hurt. "This is the end for you and me. Say your good-byes." "Don't leave like this," he said in a weak voice. "You didn't even let me say good-bye to Mullah Faizullah." She turned and walked around the bus. She heard him following her. When she got to the bus door, she heard him behind her. "Mariam dear." She climbed the steps. She could see Jalil walking next to the bus from the side, but she did not look out the window. She walked to the back where Rasheed sat with her suitcase. She did not turn to look when Jalil put his hands on the window and knocked. When the bus started to move forward, she did not turn to see him running next to it.When the bus left, she didn't look back to see him go away. Rasheed sat by the window. He put his hand on hers and said, "There, there, girl." He looked out the window as if he saw something more interesting.

They got to Rasheed's house late the next day. "We are in Deh-Mazang," he said. They were outside. He held her bag and opened the front gate. "It's in the south-west of the city. The zoo and the university are near." Mariam nodded. She found it hard to understand his Farsi because of his Kabul accent and Pashto. But he understood her Farsi easily. Mariam looked at the narrow, dirty street. The houses were close together with small yards. Most had flat roofs and were made of brick or mud, like the mountains around the city. Dirty water ran in the gutters. There was some rubbish on the street. Rasheed's house had two floors and used to be blue. When he opened the gate, Mariam saw a small, messy yard with dead grass. There was a toilet outside, a well with a pump, and some dying young trees. Near the well was a shed and a bicycle.

"Your father said you like fishing," Rasheed said as they walked to the house. There was no back yard. "There are rivers north of here with fish. Maybe I will take you." He opened the front door and she went inside. Rasheed's house was smaller than Jalil's, but it was much bigger than Mariam and Nana's small house. There was a hall, a living room downstairs, and a kitchen. He showed her pots, pans, and a cooker. The living room had a green sofa with a tear fixed badly. The walls were empty. There was a table and chairs, and a metal stove in the corner. Mariam stood in the middle of the room, looking around. In her old house, she could touch the ceiling. She knew how the sun showed the time. She knew every part of her old house. Now, all that was gone. Nana was dead, and she was in a strange city, far from her old life. She was in a stranger's house, with many rooms and the smell of smoke. The cupboards were full of things she didn't know. The curtains were heavy. The ceiling was too high to touch. She felt like she couldn't breathe. She missed Nana, Mullah Faizullah, and her old life. She started to cry.

"Why are you crying?" Rasheed said, annoyed. He gave her a handkerchief. He lit a cigarette and watched her. "Finished?" Mariam nodded. "Sure?" "Yes." He took her arm and led her to the living room window. "This window faces north," he said. "That's the Asmai mountain. To the left is Ali Abad mountain. The university is at the bottom. Behind us, to the east, is Shir Darwaza mountain. They fire a cannon from there every day at noon. Stop crying now. I mean it." Mariam wiped her eyes. "I hate the sound of a woman crying," he said with a frown. "I have no patience for it." "I want to go home," Mariam said. Rasheed sighed. Smoke went into her face. "I won't take that personally this time." He took her arm again and led her upstairs.

There was a dark hall and two bedrooms. The door to the bigger room was open. Inside, it was simple: a bed, a cupboard, a chest of drawers. The walls were empty except for a small mirror. Rasheed closed the door. "This is my room." He said she could have the other room, the guest room. "I like sleeping alone." Mariam was happy about this. Her room was much smaller than the one at Jalil's house. It had a bed, an old chest of drawers, and a small cupboard. The window looked out onto the yard and the street. Rasheed put her bag in a corner. Mariam sat on the bed. "You didn't see," he said. He stood in the doorway. "Look on the windowsill. Do you know what they are? I put them there before I went to Herat." Mariam saw a basket with white flowers. "Do you like them? Are you happy?" "Yes." "Then thank me." "Thank you. I'm sorry. Tashakor-" "You are shaking. Maybe I scare you. Do I scare you? Are you afraid of me?" Mariam didn't look at him, but she heard him teasing her. She shook her head quickly. This was her first lie in their marriage. "No? Good. Good for you. This is your home now. You will like it. We have electricity most days and nights." He started to leave. He stopped at the door, smoked his cigarette, and looked at her. She thought he would say something, but he didn't. He closed the door and left her alone with her bag and the flowers.

For the first few days, Mariam mostly stayed in her room. The call to prayer woke her up early, and she went back to bed. She heard Rasheed in the bathroom and then coming to check on her before he went to work. She watched from her window as he put his lunch on his bicycle, walked it to the street, and rode away. She felt lost and sad. Sometimes she went to the kitchen, touched the sticky counters and curtains that smelled of burnt food. She looked in the drawers at the different spoons and knives. These things for her new life made her feel like she didn't belong. In her old house, she always felt hungry. Here, she rarely wanted to eat. Sometimes she took rice and bread to the living room window. She could see the roofs of the houses, women hanging clothes, children, chickens, and cows. She thought about sleeping on the roof with Nana in the summer and reading with Mullah Faizullah in the winter. She missed everything. Alone in the house, Mariam walked around, from the kitchen to the living room, upstairs to her room and back down. She ended up in her room, praying or sitting on the bed, missing her mother, feeling sick and wanting to go home. As the sun went down, Mariam felt more and more worried. She was scared about what Rasheed might do to her at night, what husbands do to their wives. She lay in bed, nervous, while he ate downstairs. He always came to her room and looked in. "You can't be sleeping. It's only seven. Are you awake? Answer me." He kept asking until she said, "I'm here." He sat in her doorway. She could see him, the smoke, and his cigarette light. He told her about his day, about making shoes for important people. He told her old stories about shoes, like how putting them on a bed brings death. He said he didn't believe them, that women believed in superstitions more. He told her things he heard, like the American president, Richard Nixon, leaving his job because of a problem. Mariam didn't know Nixon or the problem. She just waited for him to finish talking, finish his cigarette, and leave. Only when she heard him go to his room did she feel less scared.

Then one night, he finished his cigarette but stayed in the doorway. "Are you going to unpack that bag?" he asked. He pointed to her suitcase. "I thought you needed time. But this is too much. A week is gone... So, from tomorrow morning, I expect you to act like a wife. Understand?" Mariam started to shake. "I need an answer." "Yes." "Good," he said. "What did you think? This is a hotel? I am a hotel worker? Oh. Oh. What did I say about crying, Mariam?" The next morning, after Rasheed left, Mariam unpacked and put her clothes in the dresser. She got water from the well and cleaned the windows. She swept the floors and cleaned the corners of the ceiling. She opened the windows to let fresh air in. She put lentils in water, cut carrots and potatoes, and left them in water too. She found flour and made bread dough, just like Nana taught her. She covered the dough and put on a headscarf to go to the public oven. Rasheed told her where it was, but Mariam just followed the women and children going the same way. The children wore clothes that were too big or too small and broken shoes. They played with old bicycle tires and sticks. Their mothers walked in groups, some with full face covers, some with only headscarves. Mariam heard them talking and laughing. As she walked with her head down, she heard them talking about sick children or lazy husbands. They said they never had a break. They talked about husbands who gambled or only cared about their mothers. Mariam wondered why all these women had such bad luck with their husbands. Or was it just a game women played, like making dough? Would they expect her to join in soon? In the line for the oven, Mariam felt people looking at her and whispering. Her hands started to sweat. She thought they knew she was born outside of marriage, a shame to her father. She thought they knew she had hurt her mother and shamed herself. She wiped her upper lip with her headscarf and tried to be brave. For a few minutes, it was okay.

Then someone touched her shoulder. Mariam turned and saw a woman with light skin, a bit fat, wearing a headscarf. She had short, curly black hair and a kind, round face. Her lips were bigger than Mariam's, the bottom one hanging a little because of a large dark mole. She had big green eyes that looked at Mariam in a friendly way. "You are Rasheed jan's new wife, aren't you?" the woman said, smiling. "The one from Herat. You are so young! Mariam jan, right? My name is Fariba. I live on your street, five houses down, the one with the green door. This is my son Noor." The boy next to her had a happy face and curly hair like his mother. He had some black hairs on his left ear. His eyes looked a bit wild. He raised his hand. "Hello, Auntie." "Noor is ten. I have an older boy too, Ahmad." "He's thirteen," Noor said. "Thirteen acting like he's forty." Fariba laughed. "My husband is Hakim," she said. "He's a teacher here. You should visit sometime, we'll have tea-" And then suddenly, the other women came closer to Mariam, forming a circle around her quickly. "So you are Rasheed jan's young wife-" "How do you like Kabul?" "I have been to Herat. I have a cousin there." "Do you want a boy or a girl first?" "The towers! Oh, so beautiful! What a lovely city!" "A boy is better, Mariam jan, they keep the family name-" "No! Boys get married and leave. Girls stay and take care of you when you are old." "We heard you were coming." "Have twins. One of each! Then everyone is happy." Mariam stepped back. She was breathing fast. Her ears were ringing, her heart beat quickly, her eyes moved from face to face. She stepped back again, but she was in the middle of the circle. She saw Fariba, who looked worried and saw Mariam was scared. "Leave her alone!" Fariba said. "Move! Leave her alone! You are scaring her!" Mariam held the dough close and pushed through the women. "Where are you going, sister?" She pushed until she was free and then ran up the street. She got to the end and realized she ran the wrong way. She turned and ran back, head down, falling once and hurting her knee badly. She got up and ran past the women. "What's wrong?" "You are bleeding, sister!" Mariam turned one corner, then another. She found the right street but couldn't remember which house was Rasheed's. She ran up and down the street, breathing hard, almost crying now. She started trying doors. Some were locked. Others opened to strange yards, dogs barking, and scared chickens. She thought about Rasheed coming home and finding her lost, her knee bleeding. Now she did start crying. She pushed on doors, praying quickly, her face wet with tears, until one opened. She saw the toilet, the well, the shed. She closed the door behind her and locked it. Then she was on her hands and knees, next to the wall, being sick. When she finished, she crawled away and sat against the wall, her legs out. She had never felt so alone.

When Rasheed came home that night, he had a paper bag. Mariam was sad he didn't notice the clean windows, the swept floors. But he was happy she had put his dinner on a cloth on the floor. "I made daal," Mariam said. "Good. I'm very hungry." She poured water for him to wash his hands. As he dried them, she gave him a hot bowl of daal and rice. This was the first meal she cooked for him. She was still shaking from what happened at the public oven. She worried about the daal, if it was too much ginger or not enough yellow spice. He put his spoon in the yellow daal. Mariam felt dizzy. What if he didn't like it? What if he was angry? "Be careful," she said. "It's hot." Rasheed blew on the spoon and ate. "It's good," he said. "A little less salt, but good. Maybe better than good." Mariam felt better and watched him eat. She felt a little proud. She had done well, maybe better than good. She was surprised by the happiness she felt from his small compliment. The bad feeling from the day went away a little. "Tomorrow is Friday," Rasheed said. "Shall I show you around?" "Around Kabul?" "No. Calcutta." Mariam blinked. "It's a joke. Of course Kabul. Where else?" He took something from the paper bag. "But first, I have to tell you something." He took out a blue full face cover (burqa). The cloth fell over his legs. He rolled it up and looked at Mariam. "I have customers, men, who bring their wives to my shop. The women don't cover their faces, they talk to me, look me in the eye. They wear makeup and short skirts. Sometimes they even show me their feet for size, and their husbands watch. They let them. They don't care that a stranger touches their wives' bare feet! They think they are modern because they are educated. They don't see they are losing their honor and pride." He shook his head. "They mostly live in the rich parts of Kabul. I will take you there. You will see. But they are here too, Mariam, in this area, these weak men. There is a teacher down the street, Hakim, and I see his wife Fariba walking alone with just a scarf on her head. It makes me angry to see a man who can't control his wife." He looked at Mariam strongly. "But I am a different man, Mariam. Where I come from, one wrong look, one wrong word, and blood is spilled. Where I come from, only the husband sees his wife's face. Remember that. Do you understand?" Mariam nodded. When he gave her the bag, she took it. The good feeling from his praise about her cooking was gone. Instead, she felt small. This man's wishes felt as strong and big as the mountains. Rasheed gave her the bag. "So, we understand each other. Now, give me more of that daal."

Mariam had never worn a burqa before. Rasheed had to help her. The top part felt tight and heavy. It was strange to see the world through the mesh. She tried walking in her room but kept stepping on the bottom and falling. Not being able to see to the sides felt strange, and she didn't like the cloth pressing against her mouth. "You'll get used to it," Rasheed said. "Maybe you'll even like it." They took a bus to a park called Shar-e-Nau. Children were on swings and playing volleyball. They walked and watched boys fly kites. Mariam walked next to Rasheed, sometimes tripping on the burqa. For lunch, Rasheed took her to a kebab place near a mosque. The floor was sticky, the air smoky. It smelled a bit like raw meat, and the music was loud. The cooks were thin boys fanning the meat and hitting flies. Mariam had never been in a restaurant. It felt strange to sit with so many strangers and lift her burqa to eat. She felt a little of the same worry as at the public oven, but Rasheed being there helped. After a while, she didn't mind the music, the smoke, or the people so much. And the burqa, surprisingly, felt safe. It was like a window you could only see through from one side. Inside it, she could watch others, protected from people looking at her. She didn't worry that people knew her past secrets. On the streets, Rasheed pointed out buildings: the American Embassy, the Foreign Ministry. He pointed to cars and said their names and where they were made. "Which is your favourite?" he asked. Mariam pointed to a Russian car, and Rasheed laughed. Kabul was much more crowded than the little she had seen of Herat. There were fewer trees and horse carts, but more cars, taller buildings, traffic lights, and paved roads. And everywhere, Mariam heard the different Kabul way of speaking. Rasheed bought her ice cream from a street seller. It was her first time eating ice cream. She ate all of it, with the nuts and noodles at the bottom. She loved how it felt and how sweet it was. They walked to a place called Chicken Street. It was a narrow, busy market in a rich area, Rasheed said. "Rich people live around here, diplomats, royal family. Not like us." "I don't see any chickens," Mariam said. "That's the one thing you won't find on Chicken Street." Rasheed laughed. The street had shops selling hats and colourful coats. Rasheed stopped to look at a knife and an old gun. "And I am Moshe Dayan," Rasheed said quietly. He smiled a little, and Mariam felt it was just for her. A private, married smile. They walked past shops selling carpets, crafts, sweets, flowers, and clothes. Mariam saw young girls sewing and ironing behind curtains. Sometimes, Rasheed greeted shopkeepers he knew, in Farsi or Pashto. When they shook hands and kissed cheeks, Mariam stood a little way off. Rasheed didn't call her over or introduce her. He asked her to wait outside a shop that sold embroidered things. "I know the owner," he said. "I'll just go in for a minute." Mariam waited on the busy street. She watched cars moving slowly, honking at people and donkeys. She watched the shopkeepers smoking or spitting, showing their goods. But she looked at the women most. The women here were different from the poor areas where she lived, where many women covered completely. These women were, as Rasheed said, "modern." They were married to modern men who didn't mind their wives walking among strangers with makeup and no headscarves. Mariam watched them walking confidently, sometimes with a man, sometimes alone, sometimes with children who wore nice shoes and watches, who walked bicycles with high handlebars and gold wheels. This was not like the children in Deh-Mazang, who had marks from flies and played with old tires and sticks. These women carried bags and wore skirts that made noise. Mariam even saw one smoking in a car. Their nails were long and painted. Their lips were red. They wore high heels and walked fast, as if they were always busy. They wore dark glasses, and when they walked by, Mariam smelled their perfume. She thought they all had university degrees, that they worked in offices, typed, smoked, and made important calls. These women were a mystery to Mariam. They made her feel small, plain, not wanting much, and not knowing many things. Then Rasheed touched her shoulder and gave her something. "Here." It was a dark red silk scarf with beads and gold sewing. "Do you like it?" Mariam looked up. Rasheed did something kind then. He blinked and looked away. Mariam thought of Jalil, how he gave her gifts loudly and happily, in a way that only allowed her to say thank you. Nana was right about Jalil's gifts. They were just small things to make him feel better, not real gifts. This scarf, Mariam saw, was a true gift. "It's beautiful," she said.

That night, Rasheed came to her room again. But instead of smoking in the doorway, he walked in and sat beside her on the bed. The bed made noise as it moved with his weight. He waited a moment, then put his hand on her neck, pressing the bones at the back. His thumb moved down, touching her chest bone, then the skin below it. Mariam started to shake. His hand moved lower, his nails catching on her shirt. "I can't," she whispered, looking at him in the moonlight, his big body, the gray hair on his chest. His hand was on her right breast, squeezing hard through her shirt. She heard him breathing deeply. He got under the blanket next to her. She felt his hand trying to open his belt, her trousers. Her hands held the sheets tightly. He moved on top of her, and she made a small cry. Mariam closed her eyes, bit her teeth together. The pain was sudden and strong. Her eyes opened wide. She breathed in sharply and bit her thumb. She put her free arm around Rasheed's back and her fingers dug into his shirt. Rasheed put his face in her pillow. Mariam stared at the ceiling above him, shaking, her lips tight, feeling his fast breaths on her shoulder. The air smelled of smoke and the food they ate. Sometimes his ear touched her cheek, and she felt he had shaved it. When he finished, he rolled off her, breathing heavily. He put his arm over his eyes. In the dark, she saw the blue light of his watch. They lay there for a while, not looking at each other. "There is no shame in this, Mariam," he said, his words a little unclear. "It is what married people do. It is what the Prophet and his wives did. There is no shame." A few moments later, he moved the blanket and left the room. He left the shape of his head on her pillow. He left her to feel the pain below. She looked at the stars and a cloud over the moon, like a wedding cover.

Ramadan was in the fall of 1974. For the first time, Mariam saw how the new moon changed a city, its speed and feeling. Kabul became quiet. Traffic was slow. Shops closed. Restaurants turned off their lights. Mariam didn't see people smoking outside or drinking tea. And at sunset, when the cannon fired, the city broke its fast. Mariam did too, with bread and a date. For the first time, she felt happy to share a feeling with others. Rasheed didn't fast except for a few days. When he did, he was in a bad mood. Hunger made him short-tempered and impatient. One night, Mariam was late with dinner. He started eating bread with radishes. Even when she put the rice and meat stew in front of him, he didn't eat it. He said nothing, just chewed the bread, his face tense, a vein on his forehead big and angry. He kept chewing and staring. When Mariam spoke to him, he looked at her without seeing her face and put more bread in his mouth. Mariam was happy when Ramadan ended. Back in her old home, on the first day of the Eid celebration after Ramadan, Jalil would visit. He would wear a suit and tie and bring Eid gifts. One year, he gave Mariam a wool scarf. They would have tea, and then Jalil would leave. "Going to celebrate Eid with his real family," Nana would say as he crossed the stream and waved. Mullah Faizullah would also come. He would bring her chocolate wrapped in paper, colored boiled eggs, and cookies. After he left, Mariam would climb a tree with her treats. She would eat the chocolate and drop the paper wrappers like silver flowers. When the chocolate was gone, she would eat the cookies and draw faces on the eggs with a pencil. But she didn't feel much joy. Mariam hated Eid, the time when families visited each other in their best clothes. She imagined Herat full of happiness, people being kind and friendly. Sadness would cover her like a cloth and only leave when Eid was over. This year, for the first time, Mariam saw the Eid she had imagined. Rasheed and she went out. Mariam had never walked among so many lively people. Families filled the city, visiting relatives despite the cold. On their street, Mariam saw Fariba and her son Noor, who wore a suit. Fariba, with a white scarf, walked next to a thin, shy man with glasses. Her older son, Ahmad, was there too. He had serious eyes and a thoughtful face, looking older than his age, unlike his brother. Ahmad wore a shiny pendant around his neck. Fariba must have seen her, walking with Rasheed in the burqa. She waved and called out, "Happy Eid!" From inside the burqa, Mariam nodded slightly. "So you know that woman, the teacher's wife?" Rasheed said. Mariam said she didn't. "It's best you stay away. She talks too much. And the husband thinks he is smart because he is educated. But he is weak. Look at him. Doesn't he look like a mouse?" They went to the park, where kids played in new clothes and showed their gifts. Women carried plates of sweets. Mariam saw festive lights in shop windows and heard loud music. Strangers said "Happy Eid" to her as they passed. That night they went to a place called Chaman. Standing behind Rasheed, Mariam watched fireworks light up the sky in green, pink, and yellow. She missed sitting with Mullah Faizullah outside their old house, watching fireworks over Herat, the colors in his kind, weak eyes. But most of all, she missed Nana. Mariam wished her mother was alive to see this, to see her there, to see that happiness and beauty were possible, even for them.

They had visitors at the house for Eid. They were all men, Rasheed's friends. When someone knocked, Mariam knew to go upstairs to her room and close the door. She stayed there while the men drank tea with Rasheed, smoked, and talked. Rasheed told Mariam not to come down until the visitors left. Mariam didn't mind. She even felt good about it. Rasheed saw something special in their relationship. Her honor was important to him, something to protect. His protectiveness made her feel valued and important. On the last day of Eid, Rasheed went to visit friends. Mariam felt sick all night, so she boiled water and made green tea with cardamom. In the living room, she saw the mess from the night before: cups turned over, seeds under the cushions, plates with dried food. Mariam started cleaning, wondering how lazy men could make such a big mess. She didn't plan to go into Rasheed's room. But cleaning led her upstairs to his door, and then she was in his room for the first time, sitting on his bed, feeling like she shouldn't be there. She saw the heavy curtains, the clean shoes in a line, the cupboard door where the paint was coming off. She saw a pack of cigarettes on the chest of drawers. She put one in her mouth and stood in front of the small mirror. She blew air onto the mirror and pretended to tap ash. She put it back. She could never smoke with the easy style of the women in Kabul. On her, it looked silly. Feeling guilty, she opened the top drawer of his chest of drawers. She saw the gun first. It was black, with a wooden handle. Mariam made sure to remember which way it was pointing before she picked it up. She turned it in her hands. It was much heavier than it looked. The handle felt smooth, the front part was cold. It felt strange that Rasheed owned something only made to kill someone. But maybe he kept it to keep them safe. To keep her safe. Under the gun were some magazines with bent corners. Mariam opened one. Her stomach dropped. Her mouth opened by itself. On every page were beautiful women with no clothes on. They lay in beds and looked at Mariam with tired eyes. In most pictures, their legs were open, and Mariam could see the dark place between them. In some, the women were lying down as if praying. They looked back over their shoulders with a look of boredom. Mariam quickly put the magazine back. She felt strange, like she had taken medicine. Who were these women? How could they let themselves be in pictures like this? Her stomach felt sick. Was this what he did on the nights he didn't come to her room? Had she not been good enough for him in that way? What about all his talk of honor and rules, his dislike of the women customers who only showed their feet for shoes? A woman's face, he said, is only her husband's business. Surely the women in these magazines had husbands, or brothers. If so, why did Rasheed make her cover up when he didn't mind looking at the private parts of other men's wives and sisters? Mariam sat on his bed, confused and embarrassed. She held her face in her hands and closed her eyes. She breathed deeply until she felt calmer. Slowly, she found a reason. He was a man, after all, living alone for years before she came. His needs were different from hers. For her, after all this time, being with him was still about dealing with pain. His desire, on the other hand, was strong, sometimes almost violent. The way he held her down, squeezed her breasts hard, how fast his hips moved. He was a man. All those years without a woman. Could she blame him for being the way God made him? Mariam knew she could never talk to him about this. It was something you couldn't mention. But could she forgive it? She only had to think of the other man in her life. Jalil, who was married with nine children, having a child with Nana when they were not married. Which was worse, Rasheed's magazine or what Jalil had done? And what right did she have, a village girl, born outside marriage, to judge? Mariam tried the bottom drawer of the chest of drawers. There she found a picture of the boy, Yunus. It was black and white. He looked about four or five. He wore a striped shirt and a bow tie. He was a handsome boy, with a thin nose, brown hair, and dark eyes that looked a little tired. He looked away, as if something caught his eye as the photo was taken. Below that, Mariam found another photo, also black and white, a bit blurry. It showed a woman sitting, and behind her, a thinner, younger Rasheed with black hair. The woman was beautiful. Maybe not as beautiful as the women in the magazine, but beautiful. Certainly more beautiful than Mariam. She had a nice chin and long black hair. High cheekbones and a soft forehead. Mariam thought of her own face, her thin lips and long chin, and felt a little jealous. She looked at this photo for a long time. There was something strange about how Rasheed seemed to be over the woman. His hands on her shoulders. His tight smile, and her face which didn't smile. The way her body leaned forward a little, as if she was trying to get away from his hands. Mariam put everything back. Later, as she was washing clothes, she felt bad that she had looked in his room. Why? What important thing did she learn? That he had a gun, that he was a man with a man's needs? And she shouldn't have looked at the photo of him and his wife for so long. She had imagined meaning in the way they stood in that one moment. What Mariam felt now, as the heavy clothes hung outside, was sadness for Rasheed. He had also had a hard life, with loss and bad luck. She thought about his son Yunus, who had built snowmen in this yard, whose feet had walked on these same stairs. The lake had taken him from Rasheed, just as a whale took the prophet with the same name in the Koran. It hurt Mariam to think of Rasheed scared and helpless, walking by the lake and begging it to give his son back. And for the first time, she felt a connection with her husband. She told herself they would be good partners after all.13. On the bus home from the doctor, Mariam saw something strange. Everywhere she looked, grey buildings and shops with metal roofs looked bright with colour. It was like a rainbow had melted into her eyes. Rasheed was tapping his fingers and singing quietly. When the bus hit a hole in the road and shook, his hand went quickly to protect her stomach. “What about Zalmai?” he said. “It’s a good name from our people.” “What if it’s a girl?” Mariam asked. “I think it’s a boy. Yes. A boy.” People on the bus started talking softly. Some pointed outside, and others looked out the windows. “Look,” Rasheed said, tapping the window glass. He was smiling. “There. Do you see?” Outside, Mariam saw people stop walking. At the traffic lights, people in cars looked up at the soft white things falling from the sky. Mariam wondered why the first snow of the season felt so special. Was it because it was clean and nobody had walked on it yet? Was it a beautiful new start before things got old and spoiled? “If it’s a girl,” Rasheed said, “and I don’t think it is, but if it is a girl, then you can choose any name you want.” Mariam woke up the next morning to the sound of cutting wood and hammering. She put a warm cloth around herself and went outside into the snowy yard. The heavy snow from the night before had stopped. Now, only a few light snowflakes fell on her face. The air was still and smelled of burning coal. Kabul was very quiet, covered in white, with smoke rising here and there. She found Rasheed in the toolshed, hitting nails into a piece of wood. When he saw her, he took a nail from his mouth. “It was going to be a surprise. He’ll need a bed for a baby. You weren’t supposed to see it until I finished.” Mariam wished he wouldn’t be so sure it was a boy. She was happy about being pregnant, but his hope made her feel worried. Yesterday, Rasheed had bought a soft leather winter coat for a boy, with warm sheep’s wool inside and red and yellow patterns on the sleeves. Rasheed picked up a long, thin board. As he cut it in half, he said the stairs worried him. “We’ll have to change them later, when he’s old enough to climb.” He also said the stove worried him. Knives and forks would need to be put high up. “You must be very careful. Boys do dangerous things.” Mariam pulled her cloth tighter because it was cold.

The next morning, Rasheed said he wanted to invite his friends for dinner to celebrate. All morning, Mariam cleaned food and wet rice. She cut eggplants to cook and made food with vegetables and meat. She cleaned the floor, hit the curtains to remove dust, and let fresh air into the house, even though it was snowing again. She put soft beds and pillows along the walls in the main room and put bowls of sweets and nuts on the table. She went to her room before the first men arrived in the early evening. She lay in bed and listened as the men downstairs started making noise, laughing and talking loudly. She kept touching her stomach. She thought about the baby growing inside her, and a big wave of happiness came over her, like a door opening quickly in the wind. Tears came to her eyes. Mariam thought about her long bus trip with Rasheed, from the west part of the country near Iran to the east part where Kabul is. They had passed small and large towns and many small groups of houses one after another. They had gone over mountains and dry, empty lands, from one area to another. And here she was now, after all that, with her own home, her own husband, going towards the last, much-wanted part of her life: being a mother. It felt wonderful to think about this baby, her baby, their baby. It felt amazing to know that her love for it was already bigger than any feeling she had ever had. She didn’t need to play games with stones anymore. Downstairs, someone was getting a musical instrument ready. Then came the sound of a hammer making another drum ready. Someone cleared their throat. And then there was singing, whistling, clapping, and shouting. Mariam gently touched her stomach. The doctor had said the baby was no bigger than a fingernail. I’m going to be a mother, she thought. “I’m going to be a mother,” she said. Then she laughed to herself and said it again and again, enjoying the words. When Mariam thought about this baby, her heart felt very big and full of love. It grew and grew until all the bad feelings, all the sadness, all the loneliness and feeling like she was not good enough, went away. This is why God had brought her here, across the whole country. She knew it now. She remembered a line from the holy book that her teacher had taught her: And God is everywhere, so wherever you turn there is God’s plan… She put down her prayer mat and prayed. When she finished, she put her hands together in front of her face and asked God not to let all this good luck go away.

It was Rasheed’s idea to go to the public bathhouse. Mariam had never been to one, but he said it felt wonderful to step out into the cold air afterwards, with the heat still coming from your skin. In the women’s bathhouse, shapes moved around Mariam in the steam. She saw a side of a body here, the shape of a shoulder there. The sounds of young girls crying out, old women making noises, and water running echoed around the room as people cleaned their backs and washed their hair. Mariam sat alone in a corner, rubbing her feet with a stone, separated from the others by the steam. Then there was blood, and she was screaming. Now she heard feet running on the wet floor. Faces looked at her through the steam. People made unhappy sounds. Later that night, in bed, a woman named Fariba told her husband that when she heard the cry and ran over, she found Rasheed’s wife in a corner, holding her knees, with blood on the floor near her feet. “You could hear the poor girl’s teeth hitting together, Hakim, she was shaking so much.” When Mariam saw her, Fariba said, she asked in a high, begging voice, It’s normal, isn’t it? Isn’t it? Isn’t it normal?

Another bus ride with Rasheed. It was snowing again, falling heavily this time. It was making piles on the sides of the road and on roofs, gathering on the trees. Mariam watched the shopkeepers clearing snow from their shops. A group of boys ran after a black dog. They waved in a friendly way at the bus. Mariam looked at Rasheed. His eyes were closed. He wasn’t singing. Mariam leaned her head back and closed her eyes too. She wanted to take off her cold socks and her wet wool sweater that felt rough on her skin. She wanted to get away from this bus. At the house, Rasheed put a warm cover over her when she lay on the sofa, but he did it quickly, not really caring. “What kind of answer is that?” he said again. “That’s what a religious teacher says. You pay a doctor, you want a better answer than ‘God’s will’.” Mariam pulled her knees up under the cover and said he should rest. “God’s will,” he said angrily. He sat in his room smoking cigarettes all day. Mariam lay on the sofa, hands between her knees, watching the snow moving in circles outside the window. She remembered her mother saying once that every snowflake was a sad breath from an unhappy woman somewhere in the world. That all the sad breaths went up to the sky, became clouds, then broke into small pieces that fell silently on the people below. As a reminder of how women like us suffer, she had said. How quietly we deal with everything that happens to us.

14. The sadness kept coming back to Mariam quickly. Just thinking about the baby’s bed that wasn’t finished in the toolshed, or the soft coat in Rasheed’s cupboard, was enough to make her feel terrible. The baby seemed real then, and she could hear it, hear it making hungry noises, its gurgles and sounds. She felt it touching her body. The sadness washed over her, lifted her up, and turned her upside down. Mariam was very surprised that she could miss someone she had never even seen so much. Then there were days when life didn’t feel so dark for Mariam. Days when just thinking about doing her normal daily tasks didn’t feel so tiring, when it didn’t take a lot of effort to get out of bed, to pray, to wash clothes, to cook for Rasheed. Mariam didn’t want to go outside. Suddenly, she felt jealous of the women in the neighbourhood who had many children. Some had seven or eight and didn’t understand how lucky they were, how special it was that their children had grown well inside them, lived to move in their arms and drink milk from their bodies. Children that they had not lost with soapy water and the dirt of other people going down a bathhouse drain. Mariam felt angry with them when she heard them complain about sons who didn’t behave well and daughters who were lazy. A voice inside her head tried to comfort her with kind but wrong ideas. You’ll have others, if God wishes. You are young. You will surely have many other chances. But Mariam’s sadness was for this specific baby. Mariam felt sad for this child, who had made her so happy for a while. Some days, she thought the baby had been a gift she didn’t deserve, that she was being punished for what she had done to her mother. Wasn’t it true that she might as well have put the rope around her mother’s neck herself? Daughters who were not loyal did not deserve to be mothers, and this was fair punishment. She had bad dreams, about her mother’s bad spirit coming into her room at night, putting its claws into her stomach, and stealing her baby. In these dreams, her mother laughed loudly and felt she was right. Other days, Mariam felt very angry. It was Rasheed’s fault for celebrating too early. For believing too strongly that she was having a boy. For naming the baby already. For thinking he knew God’s plan. His fault, for making her go to the bathhouse. Something there, the steam, the dirty water, the soap, something there had caused this to happen. No. Not Rasheed. It was her fault. She became very angry with herself for sleeping in the wrong way, for eating food that was too spicy, for not eating enough fruit, for drinking too much tea. It was God’s fault, for showing her something wonderful and then taking it away. For not giving her what He had given to so many other women. For showing her, in a tempting way, what He knew would make her happiest, then pulling it away. But thinking about whose fault it was didn’t help. All these angry thoughts going around in her head were wrong, against her religion. God was not cruel. He was not a small-minded God. Her teacher’s words came into her head: Blessed is He in Whose hand is the power, and He Who has power over all things, Who made death and life so He can test you. Feeling very guilty, Mariam would kneel and pray for forgiveness for these thoughts.

Meanwhile, Rasheed had changed since the day at the bathhouse. Most nights when he came home, he hardly talked anymore. He ate, smoked, went to bed, sometimes came back in the middle of the night for sex that was quick and, lately, quite rough. He was more likely to be unhappy these days, to find problems with her cooking, to complain about things left in the yard or point out even small dirty spots in the house. Sometimes, he took her around town on Fridays, like he used to, but on the streets he walked fast and always a few steps in front of her, without talking, not caring about Mariam who almost had to run to keep up. He wasn’t so quick to laugh on these trips anymore. He didn’t buy her sweets or gifts, didn’t stop and tell her the names of places like he used to. Her questions seemed to make him angry. One night, they were sitting in the living room listening to the radio. Winter was ending. The strong winds that put snow on your face and made your eyes water had stopped. Silver pieces of snow were melting off the trees and would be replaced soon by small, light green buds. Rasheed was shaking his foot without thinking to the music, his eyes narrowed because of the cigarette smoke. “Are you angry with me?” Mariam asked. Rasheed said nothing. The song finished, and the news started. A woman’s voice said that the leader, President Daoud Khan, had sent another group of helpers from Russia back to their country, which made Russia unhappy. “I worry that you are angry with me.” Rasheed made a tired sound. “Are you?” His eyes looked at her. “Why would I be angry?” “I don’t know, but ever since the baby—” “Do you think I am that kind of man, after everything I have done for you?” “No. Of course not.” “Then stop bothering me!” “I’m sorry. Forgive me, Rasheed. I’m sorry.” He put out his cigarette and lit another. He turned up the radio. “I’ve been thinking, though,” Mariam said, speaking louder so he could hear over the music. Rasheed made another tired sound, more annoyed this time, and turned the radio down again. He rubbed his forehead, looking tired. “What now?” “I’ve been thinking, maybe we should bury the baby properly. Just us, say a few prayers, nothing more.” Mariam had been thinking about it for a while. She didn’t want to forget this baby. It didn’t feel right not to mark this loss in a way that would last. “What for? That’s a silly idea.” “It would make me feel better, I think.” “Then you do it,” he said sharply. “I have already buried one son. I will not bury another. Now, if you don’t mind, I am trying to listen.” He turned the radio up again, leaned his head back, and closed his eyes. One sunny morning that week, Mariam chose a place in the yard and dug a hole. “In the name of God and with God, and in the name of God’s messenger, may God bless him and give him peace,” she said quietly as her shovel went into the ground. She put the soft coat that Rasheed had bought for the baby in the hole and put dirt over it. “You make the night become day and You make the day become night, and You bring the living from the dead and You bring the dead from the living, and You give food to who You want without limit.” She patted the dirt with the back of the shovel. She sat by the small hill of dirt, closed her eyes. Give food, God. Give food to me.

15. APRIL 1978 On April 17, 1978, the year Mariam turned nineteen, a man named Mir Akbar Khyber was found killed. Two days later, there was a big protest in Kabul. Everyone in the neighbourhood was in the streets talking about it. Through the window, Mariam saw neighbours standing around, talking excitedly, holding small radios to their ears. She saw Fariba leaning against her house wall, talking with a woman who was new to the area. Fariba was smiling, and her hands were on her pregnant stomach. The other woman, whose name Mariam didn’t know, looked older than Fariba, and her hair had a strange purple colour. She was holding a little boy’s hand. Mariam knew the boy’s name was Tariq, because she had heard this woman call him that name on the street. Mariam and Rasheed didn’t join the neighbours. They listened on the radio as about ten thousand people went into the streets and marched in the government area of Kabul. Rasheed said that Mir Akbar Khyber had been an important communist, and that his supporters were saying President Daoud Khan’s government killed him. He didn’t look at her when he said this. These days, he never did, and Mariam was never sure if he was talking to her. “What is a communist?” she asked. Rasheed made a noise and lifted both his eyebrows. “You don’t know what a communist is? Such a simple thing. Everyone knows. It’s common knowledge. You don’t… Oh. I don’t know why I’m surprised.” Then he put his feet on the table and said quietly that it was someone who believed in Karl Marxist. “Who is Karl Marxist?” Rasheed made a tired sound. On the radio, a woman’s voice was saying that Taraki, the leader of a part of the Afghan communist party, was in the streets giving strong speeches to the protesters. “What I meant was, what do they want?” Mariam asked. “These communists, what do they believe?” Rasheed laughed quietly and shook his head, but Mariam thought she saw that he wasn’t sure in the way he crossed his arms and moved his eyes. “You know nothing, do you? You are like a child. Your mind is empty. There is no information in it.” “I ask because—” “Chup ko. Be quiet.” Mariam was quiet. It was not easy to accept him talking to her like this, to deal with his looking down on her, his making fun of her, his bad words, his walking past her like she was just a house cat. But after four years of marriage, Mariam understood clearly how much a woman could accept when she was afraid. And Mariam was afraid. She lived in fear of his changing moods, his quick anger, his wanting to make even simple talks into arguments that, sometimes, he would end with hitting, slapping, kicking, and sometimes try to say sorry for with bad apologies, and sometimes not. In the four years since the day at the bathhouse, there had been six more times when she hoped for a baby and then lost it. Each loss, each time it happened, each trip to the doctor felt worse for Mariam than the time before. With each disappointment, Rasheed had become more distant and unhappy. Now nothing she did made him happy. She cleaned the house, made sure he always had clean shirts, cooked his favourite food. Once, it went very wrong, she even bought makeup and put it on for him. But when he came home, he looked at her and made a face that showed he disliked it so much that she ran to the bathroom and washed it all off, tears of shame mixing with soapy water, red colour, and black eye makeup. Now Mariam was afraid of the sound of him coming home in the evening. The key noise, the door opening slowly – these sounds made her heart beat fast. From her bed, she listened to the sound of his shoes, to the quiet steps of his feet after he took off his shoes. With her ears, she knew what he was doing: chair legs pulled across the floor, the sad noise of the chair seat when he sat, the sound of a spoon hitting a plate, the noise of newspaper pages turning, the sound of him drinking water. And as her heart beat fast, her mind wondered what reason he would find that night to get angry with her. There was always something, some small thing that would make him very angry, because no matter what she did to make him happy, no matter how much she did what he wanted, it was not enough. She could not give him his son back. In this most important way, she had failed him – seven times she had failed him – and now she was just a problem for him. She could see it in the way he looked at her, when he looked at her. She was a problem for him. “What is going to happen?” she asked him now. Rasheed looked at her from the side. He made a sound between a tired breath and an unhappy noise, took his legs off the table, and turned off the radio. He took it upstairs to his room. He closed the door.

ON APRIL 27, Mariam’s question was answered with cracking sounds and loud, sudden roars. She ran without shoes downstairs to the living room and found Rasheed already by the window, in his undershirt, his hair messy, his hands on the glass. Mariam went to the window next to him. High above, she could see military planes flying fast, going north and east. Their very loud noises hurt her ears. Far away, loud booms sounded, and sudden clouds of smoke rose into the sky. “What is happening, Rasheed?” she said. “What is all this?” “God knows,” he said quietly. He tried the radio but only heard static. “What do we do?” Rasheed said quickly, “We wait.”

Later that day, Rasheed was still trying the radio as Mariam cooked rice with a green sauce in the kitchen. Mariam remembered a time when she had enjoyed, even looked forward to, cooking for Rasheed. Now cooking made her feel very worried. The meat dishes were always too salty or had no taste for him. The rice was said to be too oily or too dry, the bread was too soft or too hard. Rasheed’s finding fault made her feel bad in the kitchen and doubt herself. When she brought him his plate, the country’s song was playing on the radio. “I made green sauce,” she said. “Put it down and be quiet.” After the music finished, a man’s voice came on the radio. He said his name was Air Force Colonel Abdul Qader. He said that earlier that day, the rebel army had taken control of the airport and important roads in the city. Kabul Radio, the government buildings for talking and for the police, and the building for speaking with other countries had also been taken. Kabul was now in the hands of the people, he said proudly. Rebel planes had attacked the leader’s house. Tanks had broken into the area, and a strong fight was happening there. The leader’s loyal forces were almost beaten, Abdul Qader said in a voice meant to make people feel safe. Days later, when the communists started killing people quickly who were connected to Daoud Khan’s government, when people in Kabul started hearing stories of eyes taken out and private parts hurt with electricity in the prison, Mariam would hear about the killing that had happened at the leader’s house. Daoud Khan had been killed, but not before the communist rebels had killed about twenty members of his family, including women and grandchildren. There would be stories that he had killed himself, that he had been shot during the fight; stories that he had been saved for last, made to watch his family being killed, then shot. Rasheed turned up the volume and leaned in closer. “A new group of leaders from the army has been made, and our country will now be called the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,” Abdul Qader said. “The time of rich families, giving jobs to family, and unfairness is over, fellow citizens. We have ended many years of cruel rule. Power is now with the normal people and those who love freedom. A wonderful new time in the history of our country is starting. A new Afghanistan is born. We promise you that you have nothing to fear, fellow Afghans. The new government will greatly respect the rules, both religious and democratic. This is a time for happiness and celebration.” Rasheed turned off the radio. “So is this good or bad?” Mariam asked. “Bad for the rich, by the sound of it,” Rasheed said. “Maybe not so bad for us.” Mariam thought about Jalil. She wondered if the communists would go after him now. Would they put him in prison? Put his sons in prison? Take his businesses and houses from him? “Is this warm?” Rasheed said, looking at the rice. “I just put it from the pot.” He made an unhappy sound and told her to give him a plate.

Down the street, as the night lit up with sudden red and yellow lights, a very tired Fariba had lifted herself up on her arms. Her hair was wet with sweat, and drops of water were on her upper lip. By her bed, the old woman who helped with the birth watched as Fariba’s husband and sons passed the new baby around. They were amazed by the baby’s light hair, her pink cheeks and small, like a rosebud lips, her green eyes moving behind her soft eyelids. They smiled at each other when they heard her voice for the first time, a cry that started like a small animal and became a strong, loud cry. Noor said her eyes were like beautiful stones. Ahmad, who was the most religious in the family, sang the call to prayer in his baby sister’s ear and blew on her face three times. “It’s Laila, then?” Hakim asked, gently moving his daughter. “It’s Laila,” Fariba said, smiling tiredly. “Night Beauty. It’s perfect.”

Rasheed made a ball of rice with his fingers. He put it in his mouth, chewed once, then twice, before making a face and spitting it out on the cloth on the floor. “What is wrong?” Mariam asked, hating the sound of her voice which sounded like she was saying sorry. She could feel her heart beating faster, her skin feeling tight. “What is wrong?” he said, copying her voice. “What is wrong is that you have done it again.” “But I cooked it five minutes longer than usual.” “That is a clear lie.” “I promise—” He angrily shook the rice from his fingers and pushed the plate away, spilling sauce and rice on the cloth. Mariam watched as he went angrily out of the living room, then out of the house, closing the door loudly. Mariam kneeled on the ground and tried to pick up the grains of rice and put them back on the plate, but her hands were shaking badly, and she had to wait for them to stop. Fear felt heavy on her chest. She tried to take a few deep breaths. She saw her pale face in the dark living-room window and looked away. Then she heard the front door open, and Rasheed was back in the living room. “Get up,” he said. “Come here. Get up.” He grabbed her hand, opened it, and dropped a handful of small stones into it. “Put these in your mouth.” “What?” “Put. These. In. Your. Mouth.” “Stop it, Rasheed, I’m—” His strong hands grabbed her jaw. He put two fingers into her mouth and forced it open, then pushed the cold, hard stones into it. Mariam fought against him, making quiet sounds, but he kept pushing the stones in, his upper lip pulled up in a mean look. “Now chew,” he said. Through the mouth full of dirt and stones, Mariam quietly begged. Tears were coming from the sides of her eyes. “CHEW!” he shouted loudly. A sudden breath smelling of smoke hit her face. Mariam chewed. Something in the back of her mouth broke. “Good,” Rasheed said. His face was shaking. “Now you know what your rice tastes like. Now you know what you have given me in this marriage. Bad food, and nothing else.” Then he was gone, leaving Mariam to spit out stones, blood, and pieces of two broken back teeth. PART TWO

16. KABUL, SPRING 1987 Nine-year-old Laila woke up, as she did most mornings, wanting to see her friend Tariq. This morning, however, she knew she would not see Tariq. “How long will you be gone?” she had asked when Tariq told her his parents were taking him south, to the city of Ghazni, to visit his father’s brother. “Thirteen days.” “Thirteen days?” “It’s not so long. You are making a face, Laila.” “I am not.” “You are not going to cry, are you?” “I am not going to cry! Not because of you. Never.” She had kicked his leg, not the fake one but his real one, and he had playfully hit the back of her head. Thirteen days. Almost two weeks. And, after just five days, Laila had learned something important about time: Like the musical instrument Tariq’s father sometimes played old songs on, time got longer and shorter depending on if Tariq was there or not. Downstairs, her parents were arguing. Again. Laila knew what happened: Mammy, strong and difficult, walking around and shouting; Babi, sitting, looking a little foolish and confused, agreeing quietly, waiting for the anger to pass. Laila closed her door and changed her clothes. But she could still hear them. She could still hear her mother. Finally, a door closed loudly. Heavy steps. Mammy’s bed made a loud noise. Babi, it seemed, would be okay for another day. “Laila!” he called now. “I am going to be late for work!” “One minute!” Laila put on her shoes and quickly brushed her medium-length, yellow hair in the mirror. Mammy always told Laila that she had her hair colour – as well as her eyes with thick lashes that were green-blue, her cheeks with small dips when she smiled, her high cheekbones, and the shape of her lower lip, which Mammy also had – from her great-grandmother, Mammy’s grandmother. She was a fairy, very beautiful, Mammy said. Her beauty was famous in the valley. It didn’t come to the women in our family for two generations, but it certainly came to you, Laila. The valley Mammy talked about was a place in the north-east of Kabul, about one hundred kilometers away, where people spoke a different language. Both Mammy and Babi, who were cousins, were born and grew up there; they had moved to Kabul in 1960 as hopeful, happy newlyweds when Babi started studying at Kabul University. Laila quickly went downstairs, hoping Mammy wouldn’t come out of her room for another argument. She found Babi kneeling by the door screen. “Did you see this, Laila?” The tear in the screen had been there for weeks. Laila bent down next to him. “No. It must be new.” “That’s what I told Fariba.” He looked shaken, smaller, as he always did after Mammy finished with him. “She says it has been letting bees in.” Laila felt sorry for him. Babi was a small man, with thin shoulders and thin, gentle hands, almost like a woman’s. At night, when Laila went into Babi’s room, she always found him looking down, reading a book, his glasses on the end of his nose. Sometimes he didn’t even see that she was there. When he did, he put a mark in his book, smiled a quiet, friendly smile. Babi knew most of the poems by Rumi and Hafez by heart. He could talk for a long time about the fight between Britain and Russia over Afghanistan. He knew the difference between two types of cave formations, and could tell you that the distance between the earth and the sun was the same as going from Kabul to Ghazni one and a half million times. But if Laila needed the top of a sweet jar opened, she had to go to Mammy, which felt like a betrayal. Babi was not good with normal tools. When he was in charge, doors that made noise were never fixed. Water kept coming from ceilings after he tried to stop it. Dirt grew easily in kitchen cupboards. Mammy said that before he left with Noor to fight against the Russians, back in 1980, it was Ahmad who had done these things well and carefully. “But if you have a book that needs to be read quickly,” she said, “then Hakim is your man.” Still, Laila couldn’t stop feeling that at one time, before Ahmad and Noor had gone to fight the Russians – before Babi had let them go to war – Mammy too had thought Babi’s love of books was sweet, that, long ago, she too had found his forgetting things and not being good at practical things charming. “So what day is it today?” he said now, smiling in a secretive way. “Day five? Or is it six?” “Why do I care? I don’t count,” Laila lied, shrugging, loving him for remembering. Mammy had no idea that Tariq had left. “Well, his light will be shining before you know it,” Babi said, talking about the game Laila and Tariq played by sending light signals at night. They had played it for so long it was like a regular thing they did before bed, like brushing teeth. Babi ran his finger through the tear. “I’ll fix this as soon as I can. We’d better go.” He spoke louder and called over his shoulder, “We are going now, Fariba! I am taking Laila to school. Don’t forget to pick her up!” Outside, as she was getting on the seat on the back of Babi’s bicycle, Laila saw a car parked up the street, across from the house where the man who made shoes, Rasheed, lived with his wife who stayed inside a lot. It was a fancy car, not usual in this area, blue with a thick white line going along the front, the top, and the back. Laila could see two men inside, one driving, the other in the back. “Who are they?” she said. “It’s not our business,” Babi said. “Get on, you will be late for class.” Laila remembered another argument, and, that time, Mammy had stood over Babi and said in a mean way, That is your business, isn’t it, cousin? To make nothing your business. Even your own sons going to war. How I begged you. But you put your nose in those terrible books and let our sons go like they were nobody. Babi rode the bicycle up the street, Laila on the back, her arms around his stomach. As they passed the blue car, Laila saw quickly the man in the back seat: thin, with white hair, wearing a dark brown suit, with a white cloth in his suit pocket. The only other thing she had time to see was that the car had number plates from Herat. They rode the rest of the way quietly, except at the turns, where Babi slowed down carefully and said, “Hold on, Laila. Slowing down. Slowing down. There.”

In class that day, Laila found it hard to listen, because Tariq was not there and her parents had argued. So when the teacher asked her to name the main cities of Romania and Cuba, Laila was not ready. The teacher’s name was Shanzai, but, when she wasn’t there, the students called her Auntie Painter, because of the way she hit students – with the front of her hand, then the back of her hand, back and forth, like a painter using a brush. Auntie Painter was a young woman with a sharp face and thick eyebrows. On the first day of school, she had proudly told the class that her father was a poor farmer. She stood straight, and wore her very black hair pulled back tightly in a bun so that, when Auntie Painter turned around, Laila could see the dark, short hairs on her neck. Auntie Painter did not wear makeup or jewellery. She did not cover her head and told the female students they must not do it. She said women and men were equal in every way and there was no reason women should cover if men didn’t. She said that the Soviet Union was the best country in the world, like Afghanistan. It was kind to its workers, and its people were all equal. Everyone in the Soviet Union was happy and friendly, not like America, where crime made people afraid to leave their homes. And everyone in Afghanistan would be happy too, she said, once the people who were against progress, the bad criminals, were beaten. “That is why our friends from the Soviet Union came here in 1979. To help their neighbour. To help us defeat these cruel people who want our country to be old and simple. And you must help too, children. You must tell us about anyone who might know about these rebels. It is your duty. You must listen, then tell. Even if it is your parents, your uncles or aunts. Because none of them loves you as much as your country does. Your country comes first, remember! I will be proud of you, and so will your country.” On the wall behind Auntie Painter’s desk was a map of the Soviet Union, a map of Afghanistan, and a picture in a frame of the newest communist leader, Najibullah, who, Babi said, had once been the head of the feared secret police. There were other pictures too, mostly of young soldiers from the Soviet Union shaking hands with farmers, planting young trees, building houses, always smiling in a friendly way. “Well,” Auntie Painter said now, “have I stopped you from dreaming, Revolutionary Girl?” This was the name she used for Laila, because she was born on the night of the change of power in April 1978 – but Auntie Painter became angry if anyone in her class used the word change of power. What had happened, she said strongly, was a revolution, a rising up of the working people against unfairness. Religious war was another word she didn’t allow. According to her, there wasn’t even a war happening in the country areas, just small fights against trouble makers started by people she called foreigners causing problems. And certainly nobody, nobody, dared to repeat in front of her the growing stories that, after eight years of fighting, the Soviet Union was losing this war. Especially now that the American leader, Reagan, had started sending the fighters special missiles to shoot down the Soviet helicopters, now that Muslims from all over the world were joining the fight: people from Egypt, Pakistan, even rich people from Saudi Arabia, who left their money behind and came to Afghanistan to fight the religious war. “Bucharest. Havana,” Laila managed to say. “And are those countries our friends or not?” “They are, teacher. They are friendly countries.” Auntie Painter nodded quickly.

When school finished, Mammy again didn’t come to get her like she was supposed to. Laila ended up walking home with two of her classmates, Giti and Hasina. Giti was a nervous, thin little girl who wore her hair in two ponytails held by rubber bands. She always looked unhappy and walked with her books held tightly to her chest, like a shield. Hasina was twelve, three years older than Laila and Giti, but had failed the third year of school once and the fourth year twice. What she didn’t have in cleverness, Hasina had in causing trouble and a mouth that, Giti said, worked like a sewing machine. It was Hasina who had thought of the name Auntie Painter. Today, Hasina was giving advice on how to stop men you didn’t like from wanting to marry you. “A perfect way, guaranteed to work. I promise you.” “This is silly. I am too young to have someone want to marry me!” Giti said. “You are not too young.” “Well, no one has come to ask for my hand.” “That is because you have a beard, my dear.” Giti’s hand went quickly to her chin, and she looked with worry at Laila, who smiled kindly – Giti was the most serious person Laila had ever met – and shook her head to show Giti was okay. “Anyway, do you want to know what to do or not, ladies?” “Go ahead,” Laila said. “Beans. At least four cans. On the evening the ugly old man comes to ask for your hand. But the time, ladies, the time is everything. You have to keep the gas inside until it’s time to give him his tea.” “I will remember that,” Laila said. “So will he.” Laila could have said then that she didn’t need this advice because Babi had no plan to let her marry anytime soon. Although Babi worked at a big bread factory in Kabul, where he worked hard in the heat and the noisy machines making the large ovens hot and grinding grains all day, he was a man who had studied at university. He had been a teacher in a high school before the communists fired him – this was soon after the change of power in 1978, about a year and a half before the Russians had entered the country. Babi had made it clear to Laila from a young age that the most important thing in his life, after her safety, was her education. I know you are still young, but I want you to understand and learn this now, he said. Getting married can wait, learning cannot. You are a very, very clever girl. Truly, you are. You can be anything you want, Laila. I know this about you. And I also know that when this war is over, Afghanistan will need you as much as its men, maybe even more. Because a society has no chance to do well if its women are not educated, Laila. No chance. But Laila didn’t tell Hasina that Babi had said these things, or how happy she was to have a father like him, or how proud she was that he thought so highly of her, or how determined she was to continue her education just as he had his. For the last two years, Laila had received the top student award, given every year to the best student in each grade. She said nothing of these things to Hasina, though, whose own father was a bad-tempered taxi driver who in two or three years would almost certainly give her away to marry someone. Hasina had told Laila, in one of her rare serious moments, that it had already been decided that she would marry a cousin who was twenty years older than her and owned a car repair shop in another city. I have seen him twice, Hasina had said. Both times he ate with his mouth open. “Beans, girls,” Hasina said. “You remember that. Unless, of course” – here she smiled in a playful way and nudged Laila with her elbow – “it’s your young handsome prince with one leg who comes knocking. Then…” Laila pushed the elbow away. She would have felt hurt if anyone else had said that about Tariq. But she knew that Hasina was not mean. She made fun of things – it was what she did – and she made fun of everyone, especially herself. “You shouldn’t talk that way about people!” Giti said. “What people is that?” “People who have been hurt because of war,” Giti said seriously, not seeing that Hasina was playing. “I think Religious Giti here likes Tariq. I knew it! Ha! But he is already taken, don’t you know? Isn’t he, Laila?” “I do not like anyone in that way. On anyone!” They separated from Laila, and, still arguing like this, turned into their street. Laila walked alone the last three blocks. When she was on her street, she noticed that the blue car was still parked there, outside Rasheed and Mariam’s house. The older man in the brown suit was standing by the front of the car now, leaning on a walking stick, looking up at the house. That was when a voice behind Laila said, “Hey. Yellow Hair. Look here.”

17. Laila turned around and saw the front of a gun. The gun was red, the part you pull to shoot was bright green. Behind the gun was Khadim’s smiling face. Khadim was eleven, like Tariq. He was thick, tall, and his lower jaw stuck out. His father was a butcher in the area, and sometimes, Khadim was known to throw pieces of young cow’s insides at people walking by. Sometimes, if Tariq wasn’t nearby, Khadim followed Laila in the school yard during breaks, looking at her in a bad way, making small crying sounds. One time, he had tapped her on the shoulder and said, You are so very pretty, Yellow Hair. I want to marry you. Now he waved the gun. “Don’t worry,” he said. “This won’t show. Not on your hair.” “Don’t you do it! I am warning you.” “What are you going to do?” he said. “Send your person with one leg to get me? ‘Oh, dear Tariq. Oh, won’t you come home and save me from the bad person!’” Laila started to walk backwards, but Khadim was already pulling the trigger. One after another, thin streams of warm water hit Laila’s hair, then her hand when she raised it to protect her face.Then the other boys came out from where they were hiding, laughing loudly. A bad word Laila had heard on the street came to her mouth. She didn't really understand it, but the words felt very strong, and she said them now. “Your mother eats cock!” “At least she is not crazy like your mother,” Khadim answered quickly, not bothered. “At least my father is not weak like yours! And, smell your hands!” The other boys started saying the same thing. “Smell your hands! Smell your hands!” Laila did, but even before she smelled, she knew what he meant about it not being in her hair. She made a loud, sharp sound. When she did this, the boys laughed even more loudly. Laila turned around and, crying loudly, ran home.

SHE GOT WATER from the well, and, in the bathroom, filled a large bowl, and quickly took off her clothes. She put soap on her hair, rubbing her head quickly and strongly with her fingers, making small crying sounds because she felt sick. She washed the soap out with a bowl and put soap on her hair again. Many times, she felt like she was going to be sick. She kept making quiet sounds and shaking, as she rubbed the soapy cloth again and again on her face and neck until they became red. This would never have happened if Tariq was with her, she thought as she put on a clean shirt and clean trousers. Khadim would not have been brave enough. Of course, it also would not have happened if Mammy had come to get her like she was supposed to. Sometimes Laila wondered why Mammy had a child like her. She believed now that people should not have new children if they had already given all their love to their older children. It was not fair. She became very angry. Laila went to her room and fell onto her bed. When she felt a bit better, she went across the hall to Mammy's door and knocked. When she was younger, Laila used to sit for hours outside this door. She would knock softly on it and quietly say Mammy's name many times, like a magic spell to make something good happen: Mammy, Mammy, Mammy, Mammy... But Mammy never opened the door. She didn't open it this time either. Laila turned the door handle and walked in.

SOMETIMES MAMMY had good days. She got out of bed looking happy and ready to play. Her sad lower lip turned into a smile. She washed. She put on clean clothes and wore make-up on her eyes. She let Laila brush her hair, which Laila loved doing, and put earrings in her ears. They went shopping together to Mandaii Bazaar. Laila got her to play snakes and ladders, and they ate small pieces of dark chocolate, one of the few things they both liked. Laila’s favourite part of Mammy’s good days was when Babi came home, when she and Mammy looked up from the game and smiled at him with brown teeth. A feeling of happiness filled the room then, and Laila saw for a moment the love and closeness her parents had when the house was full, loud, and happy. Mammy sometimes baked on her good days and asked women from the area to come for tea and cakes. Laila was allowed to lick the bowls clean, as Mammy put the cups, napkins, and nice plates on the table. Later, Laila would sit at the living-room table and try to join the conversation, as the women talked loudly and happily and drank tea and said Mammy’s baking was very good. Even though there was never much for her to say, Laila liked to sit and listen because at these times she had a nice experience: She got to hear Mammy speaking kindly and lovingly about Babi. “What a very good teacher he was,” Mammy said. “His students loved him. And not only because he didn't hit them with rulers, like other teachers did. Students respected him because he respected them. He was great.” Mammy loved to tell the story of how she had asked him to marry her. “I was sixteen, he was nineteen. Our families lived next door to each other in Panjshir. Oh, I really liked him, friends! I used to climb the wall between our houses, and we’d play in his father’s garden. Hakim was always afraid we would be found, and my father would hit him. ‘Your father is going to hit me,’ he’d always say. He was so careful and serious, even then. And then one day I said to him, I said, ‘Cousin, what will happen? Will you ask to marry me, or should I ask you?’ I said it just like that. You should have seen his face!” Mammy would hit her hands together as the women, and Laila, laughed. Listening to Mammy tell these stories, Laila knew that there had been a time when Mammy always spoke this way about Babi. A time when her parents did not sleep in separate rooms. Laila wished she hadn’t missed those times. After Mammy told her story, they always started talking about who should marry who. When Afghanistan was free from the Russians and the boys came home, they would need wives, and so, one by one, the women talked about the girls from the area who might or might not be good wives for Ahmad and Noor. Laila always felt left out when they talked about her brothers, like they were talking about a favourite movie that she had never seen. She had been two years old when Ahmad and Noor had left Kabul for Panjshir up north, to join the army of Commander Ahmad Shah Massoud and fight. Laila remembered very little about them. A shiny necklace with 'ALLAH' on it around Ahmad’s neck. Some black hair on one of Noor’s ears. And that was all. “What about Azita?” “The rugmaker’s daughter?” Mammy said, pretending to be shocked. “Has a bigger mustache than Hakim!” “There’s Anahita. We hear she is the best student in her class at Zarghoona school.” “Have you seen the teeth on that girl? Very big teeth. It's like she has big stones instead of teeth.” “How about the Wahidi sisters?” “Those two short girls? No, no, no. Oh, no. Not for my sons. Not for my princes. They deserve better.” As the talk went on, Laila started thinking about other things, and, as always, she thought about Tariq.

MAMMY HAD PULLED the yellowish curtains. In the darkness, the room had a mixed smell of sleep, dirty clothes, sweat, old socks, perfume, and last night's food. Laila waited for her eyes to get used to the dark before she crossed the room. Even so, her feet got caught in clothes that were on the floor. Laila pulled the curtains open. At the end of the bed was an old metal folding chair. Laila sat on it and watched her mother, who was covered by blankets and not moving. The walls of Mammy’s room were covered with pictures of Ahmad and Noor. Everywhere Laila looked, people she didn't really know smiled back. Here was Noor riding a small bike with three wheels. Here was Ahmad doing his prayers, standing next to a clock that uses the sun, which Babi and he built when he was twelve. And there they were, her brothers, sitting back to back under the old pear tree in the garden. Beneath Mammy’s bed, Laila could see the corner of Ahmad’s shoe box sticking out. From time to time, Mammy showed her old, folded newspaper stories and small books that Ahmad had got from fighter groups based in Pakistan. One photo, Laila remembered, showed a man in a long white coat giving a sweet to a little boy with no legs. The words below the photo said: The Soviets want to hurt children with land mines. The story went on to say that the Soviets also liked to hide bombs inside colourful toys. If a child picked it up, the toy exploded, cutting off fingers or a whole hand. The father could not go and fight then; he had to stay home and look after his child. In another story in Ahmad’s box, a young fighter was saying that the Soviets had dropped gas on his village that burned people’s skin and made them unable to see. He said he had seen his mother and sister running to the river, coughing blood. “Mammy.” Her mother moved a little. She made a sound like a groan. “Get up, Mammy. It’s three o’clock.” Another groan. A hand came out, like the top of a submarine coming out of the water, and fell down. Her mother moved more clearly this time. Then the sound of the blankets moving. Slowly, bit by bit, Mammy appeared: first the untidy hair, then the pale face with a pained look, eyes closed tightly because of the light, a hand trying to find the top of the bed, the sheets falling down as she pulled herself up, making sounds. Mammy tried to look up, moved back because of the light, and her head fell onto her chest. “How was school?” she said quietly. So it would begin. The necessary questions, the quick, not very interested answers. Both pretending. They were like two people doing an old, boring dance, not wanting to do it. “School was fine,” Laila said. “Did you learn anything?” “The usual.” “Did you eat?” “I did.” “Good.” Mammy raised her head again, towards the window. She made a face because of the light and her eyes moved quickly. The right side of her face was red, and the hair on that side was flat. “I have a headache.” “Should I get you some aspirin?” Mammy rubbed the sides of her head. “Maybe later. Is your father home?” “It’s only three.” “Oh. Right. You said that already.” Mammy made a long sound showing she was tired. “I was dreaming just now,” she said, her voice was only a little louder than the sound of her nightdress moving on the sheets. “Just now, before you came in. But I can’t remember it now. Does that happen to you?” “Yes, Mammy, it happens to everyone.” “That’s strange.” “I should tell you that while you were dreaming, a boy shot pee out of a water gun on my hair.” “Shot what? What was that? I’m sorry.” “Pee. Urine.” “That’s... that’s terrible. Oh God. I’m sorry. Poor you. I’ll talk to him first thing in the morning. Or maybe to his mother. Yes, that would be better, I think.” “I haven’t told you who it was.” “Oh. Well, who was it?” “Never mind.” “You’re angry.” “You were supposed to pick me up.” “I was,” Mammy said in a rough voice. Laila was not sure if this was a question. Mammy began pulling at her hair. This was one of life’s big questions for Laila, that Mammy’s pulling had not made her head completely without hair. “What about... What’s his name, your friend, Tariq? Yes, what about him?” “He’s been gone for a week.” “Oh.” Mammy breathed out strongly through her nose. “Did you wash?” “Yes.” “So you’re clean, then.” Mammy looked at the window with tired eyes. “You’re clean, and everything is fine.” Laila stood up. “I have homework now.” “Of course you do. Shut the curtains before you go, my love,” Mammy said, her voice becoming quieter. She was already going back under the sheets. As Laila reached for the curtains, she saw a car pass by on the street followed by dust. It was the blue car with the Herat number plate finally leaving. She watched it until it disappeared around a turn, its back window shining in the sun. “I won’t forget tomorrow,” Mammy was saying behind her. “I promise.” “You said that yesterday.” “You don’t know, Laila.” “Know what?” Laila turned around quickly to face her mother. “What don’t I know?” Mammy’s hand went up to her chest, touched it. “In here. What’s in here.” Then it fell down weakly. “You just don’t know.”

18. A week passed, but there was still no sign of Tariq. Then another week came and went. To pass the time, Laila fixed the screen door that Babi had not fixed yet. She took down Babi’s books, cleaned them and put them in ABC order. She went to Chicken Street with Hasina, Giti, and Giti’s mother, Nila, who made clothes and sometimes sewed with Mammy. In that week, Laila came to believe that waiting was the hardest thing a person had to do. Another week passed. Laila had many terrible thoughts. He would never come back. His parents had moved away for good; the trip to Ghazni had been a trick. The adults planned it so they wouldn't have to say a sad goodbye. A land mine had hurt him again. Like it did in 1981, when he was five, the last time his parents took him south to Ghazni. That was soon after Laila’s third birthday. He was lucky that time, he only lost a leg; he was lucky to be alive. These thoughts kept going round and round in her head. Then one night Laila saw a small light that went on and off from down the street. She made a small sound, like a mix of a squeak and a gasp. She quickly got her flashlight from under the bed, but it didn’t work. Laila hit it against her hand, was angry about the dead batteries. But it didn’t matter. He was back. Laila sat on the edge of her bed, very happy and excited because she felt better, and watched that nice yellow light going on and off.

ON HER WAY to Tariq’s house the next day, Laila saw Khadim and some of his friends across the road. Khadim was sitting low on the ground, drawing in the dirt with a stick. When he saw her, he dropped the stick and moved his fingers. He said something and everyone laughed a little. Laila looked down and walked past quickly. “What did you do?” she said loudly when Tariq opened the door. Only then did she remember that his uncle was a barber (a person who cuts hair). Tariq ran his hand over his head with very short hair and smiled, showing white, slightly uneven teeth. “Like it?” “You look like you are joining the army.” “You want to feel?” He put his head down. The short hairs felt nice and scratchy on Laila's hand. Tariq wasn’t like some of the other boys, whose hair hid heads that were pointed or had ugly bumps. Tariq’s head was round and did not have bumps. When he looked up, Laila saw that his cheeks and forehead were red from the sun. “What took you so long?” she said. “My uncle was sick. Come on. Come inside.” He took her along the hall to the family room. Laila loved everything about this house. The old, worn rug in the family room, the blanket made of many different pieces of cloth on the sofa, the normal things lying around in Tariq’s house: his mother’s rolls of cloth, her sewing needles stuck in rolls of thread, the old magazines, the case for the accordion in the corner, ready to be opened and played. “Who is it?” It was his mother calling from the kitchen. “Laila,” he answered. He pulled a chair for her. The family room was brightly lit and had two windows that opened into the garden. On the window edge were empty jars that Tariq's mother used to make pickled vegetables and carrot jam. “You mean our future daughter-in-law,” his father announced, coming into the room. He was a carpenter, a thin man with white hair, about sixty years old. He had spaces between his front teeth, and his eyes were partly closed, like someone who had spent most of his life outside in the sun. He opened his arms and Laila hugged him, smelling the nice and familiar smell of wood dust from him. They kissed her cheek three times. “You keep calling her that and she’ll stop coming here,” Tariq’s mother said, passing by them. She was carrying a tray with a large bowl, a serving spoon, and four smaller bowls on it. She put the tray on the table. “Don’t listen to the old man.” She held Laila's face gently in her hands. “It’s good to see you, my dear. Come, sit down. I brought back some fruit that had been in water with me.” The table was large and made of light wood that wasn't painted or polished—Tariq’s father had built it, as well as the chairs. It was covered with a green plastic tablecloth with small purple moon shapes and stars on it. Most of the living-room wall was filled with pictures of Tariq when he was different ages. In some of the very early ones, he had two legs. “I heard your brother was sick,” Laila said to Tariq’s father, putting a spoon into her bowl of raisins, nuts, and dried apricots that had been in water. He was lighting a cigarette. “Yes, but he’s fine now, thanks to God.” “Heart attack. His second,” Tariq’s mother said, looking at her husband in a way that showed she didn't agree with him. Tariq’s father breathed out smoke and closed one eye at Laila. She thought again that Tariq's parents looked old enough to be his grandparents. His mother didn't have him until she was in her late forties. “How is your father, my dear?” Tariq’s mother said, looking at her over her bowl. As long as Laila had known her, Tariq’s mother had worn a wig. It was becoming a faded purple colour because it was old. It was pulled low on her forehead today, and Laila could see the gray hair near her ears. Some days, it was high on her forehead. But, to Laila, Tariq’s mother never looked like someone to be sorry for. What Laila saw was the calm face that showed she was sure of herself beneath the wig, the smart eyes, the nice, calm way of doing things. “He’s fine,” Laila said. “Still at Silo, of course. He’s fine.” “And your mother?” “Sometimes good, sometimes bad. The same as always.” “Yes,” Tariq’s mother said while thinking, putting her spoon into the bowl. “It must be very hard for a mother to be away from her sons.” “Will you stay for lunch?” Tariq said. “You have to,” said his mother. “I'm making soup.” “I don't want to be a bother.” “A bother?” Tariq’s mother said. “We go away for a few weeks, and you become so polite?” “All right, I’ll stay,” Laila said, her face turning red and smiling. “Okay, it's decided.” The truth was, Laila loved eating meals at Tariq’s house as much as she disliked eating them at hers. At Tariq’s, they always ate together as a family. Laila liked the purple plastic cups they used to drink from and the piece of lemon that was always in the water jug. She liked how they always started eating with a bowl of fresh yogurt, how they put juice from sour oranges on everything, even their yogurt, and how they made small, kind jokes about each other. During meals, talk always flowed easily. Even though Tariq and his parents were Pashtun people, they spoke Farsi when Laila was there, so she could understand, even though Laila understood most of their language, Pashto, because she learned it at school. Babi said that there were problems between their people – the Tajiks, who were a smaller group, and Tariq’s people, the Pashtuns, who were the biggest group in Afghanistan. Tajiks have always felt they were not treated fairly, Babi had said. Kings from the Pashtun group ruled this country for almost 250 years, Laila, but Tajiks only ruled for nine months, in 1929. And you, Laila had asked, do you feel you are not treated fairly, Babi? Babi cleaned his glasses using the edge of his shirt. “For me, it is silly and dangerous to talk about ‘I am Tajik’ and ‘you are Pashtun’ and ‘he is Hazara’ and ‘she is Uzbek.’ We are all from Afghanistan, and that’s the only important thing. But when one group rules the others for a long time... People look down on each other. They compete. It is true. It has always been true.” Maybe. But Laila never felt this in Tariq's house, where they never talked about these things. Her time with Tariq’s family always felt natural to Laila, easy and simple, not made difficult by differences in group or language, or by the personal anger and bad feelings that were always present in her own home. “How about a game of cards?” Tariq said. “Yes, go upstairs,” his mother said, moving her hand to push away her husband's smoke, showing she didn't like it. “I'll start making the soup.” They lay on their fronts in the middle of Tariq’s room and took turns giving out the cards for a game called panjpar. Moving his foot in the air like he was riding a bicycle, Tariq told her about his trip. The young peach trees he helped his uncle plant. A snake from the garden that he had caught. This room was where Laila and Tariq did their homework, where they built towers out of playing cards and drew funny pictures of each other. If it was raining, they leaned on the edge of the window, drinking warm, bubbly orange Fanta drink, and watched the big raindrops run slowly down the glass. “All right, here’s one,” Laila said, mixing the cards. “What travels all around the world but stays in one place?” “Wait.” Tariq pushed himself up and moved his false left leg. Making a face that showed pain, he lay on his side, resting on his arm. “Give me that pillow.” He put it under his leg. “There. That’s better.” Laila remembered the first time he showed her the part of his leg that was left. She had been six. With one finger, she had touched the tight, shiny skin just below his left knee. Her finger had found small hard bumps there, and Tariq had told her they were extra pieces of bone that sometimes grew after a leg was cut off. She’d asked him if the end of his leg hurt, and he said it hurt at the end of the day, when it got bigger and didn't fit the false leg well, like a finger in a small metal cap for sewing. And sometimes it gets rubbed. Especially when it’s hot. Then my skin gets red and sore, and I get bubbles on my skin, but my mother has creams that help. It's not too bad. Laila started crying suddenly. “Why are you crying?” He put his leg back on. “You asked to see it, you crybaby! If I knew you were going to cry loudly, I wouldn't have shown you.” “The answer to the question is a stamp,” he said. “What?” “The riddle. The answer is a stamp. We should go to the zoo after lunch.” “You knew that one. Did you?” “No, I didn't.” “You are cheating.” “And you are jealous.” “Of what?” “How smart I am, because I am a boy.” “Really? Tell me, who wins at chess every time?” “I let you win,” he said, laughing. They both knew this was not true. “And who failed the maths test? Who do you ask for help with your maths homework, even though you are in a higher class than me?” “I would be two classes higher if maths was not boring for me.” “I suppose geography is boring for you too.” “How did you know? Now, be quiet. So are we going to the zoo or not?” Laila smiled. “We’re going.” “Good.” “I missed you.” They were quiet for a moment. Then Tariq turned to her with a look that was half smiling and half showing he didn't like it. “What is wrong with you?” Laila wondered how many times she, Hasina, and Giti had said those same words to each other, said them quickly, after only two or three days of not seeing each other. I missed you, Hasina. Oh, I missed you too. From Tariq's look, Laila learned that boys were different from girls in this way. They didn't show their friendship in this way. They didn't feel the need to talk like this. Laila thought her brothers were probably like this too. Laila understood that boys treated friendship like the sun: they knew it was there and enjoyed its warmth, but they didn't look directly at it or talk about it openly. “I was trying to make you a little angry,” she said. He looked at her from the side. “You did.” But she thought his unhappy look became a little softer. And she thought maybe the red colour on his cheeks got a little stronger for a moment.

LAILA DIDN’T MEAN to tell him. She had, in fact, decided that telling him would be a very bad idea. Someone would get hurt, because Tariq wouldn’t be able to let it pass. But when they were on the street later, going down to the bus stop, she saw Khadim again, standing against a wall. He was surrounded by his friends, with his thumbs in his belt. He smiled at her in a challenging way. And so she told Tariq. The story came out of her mouth before she could stop it. “He did what?” She told him again. He pointed to Khadim. “Him? He’s the one? Are you sure?” “I’m sure.” Tariq closed his teeth and said something quietly to himself in Pashto that Laila didn’t hear. “You wait here,” he said, in Farsi now. “No, Tariq—” He was already crossing the street. Khadim was the first to see him. His smile disappeared, and he pushed himself off the wall. He took his thumbs out of his belt and stood taller, trying to look dangerous. The others followed his eyes. Laila wished she hadn’t said anything. What if they all attacked him together? How many were there—ten? eleven? twelve? What if they hurt him? Then Tariq stopped a few feet from Khadim and his friends. Laila thought there was a moment of thinking, maybe he would change his mind, and, when he bent down, she thought he would pretend his shoelace was undone and walk back to her. Then his hands started working, and she understood. The others understood too when Tariq stood up straight, standing on one leg. When he began hopping toward Khadim, then running at him, his false leg raised high over his shoulder like a sword. The boys stepped aside quickly. They gave him a clear path to Khadim. Then it was all dust and fists and kicks and sounds of pain. Khadim never bothered Laila again.

THAT NIGHT, as most nights, Laila set the dinner table for two only. Mammy said she wasn’t hungry. On those nights that she was, she made sure to take a plate to her room before Babi even came home. She was usually asleep or lying awake in bed by the time Laila and Babi sat down to eat. Babi came out of the bathroom, his hair—which had white flour in it when he came home—washed clean now and combed back. “What are we having, Laila?” “Leftover aush soup.” “Sounds good,” he said, folding the towel with which he had dried his hair. “So what are we working on tonight? Adding fractions?” “Actually, changing fractions to mixed numbers.” “Ah. Right.” Every night after dinner, Babi helped Laila with her homework and gave her some of his own. This was just to keep Laila a little ahead of her class, not because he didn't like the work given by the school—even with the political ideas they taught. In fact, Babi thought that the one thing the communists had done well—or at least wanted to—was in education, the job from which they had fired him. More specifically, the education of women. The government had paid for classes for all women to learn to read and write. Almost two-thirds of the students at Kabul University were women now, Babi said, women who were studying law, medicine, engineering. “Women have always had it hard in this country, Laila, but they’re probably more free now, under the communists, and have more rights than they’ve ever had before,” Babi said, always speaking quietly, knowing how much Mammy disliked any positive talk about the communists. “But it’s true,” Babi said, “it’s a good time to be a woman in Afghanistan. And you can use that, Laila.” Of course, women’s freedom—here, he shook his head sadly—is also one of the reasons people out there started fighting in the first place. By “out there,” he didn’t mean Kabul, which had always been quite modern and accepting. Here in Kabul, women taught at the university, ran schools, worked in the government. No, Babi meant the areas outside the city, especially the Pashtun regions in the south or in the east near Pakistan, where women were rarely seen on the streets and only then covered and with men. He meant those regions where men who lived by old tribal laws had fought against the communists and their rules to free women, to stop forced marriage, to make the youngest age for marriage sixteen for girls. There, men saw it as an insult to their traditions that were hundreds of years old, Babi said, to be told by the government—and a government that did not believe in God—that their daughters had to leave home, go to school, and work next to men. “God forbid that should happen!” Babi liked to say in a sarcastic way. Then he would sigh, and say, “Laila, my love, the only enemy an Afghan cannot defeat is himself.” Babi took his seat at the table, dipped bread into his bowl of aush. Laila decided that she would tell him about what Tariq had done to Khadim, during the meal, before they started on fractions. But she never got the chance. Because, right then, there was a knock at the door, and, on the other side of the door, a stranger with news.

19. “I need to speak to your parents, my daughter,” he said when Laila opened the door. He was a strong man, with a sharp face made rough by the weather. He wore a coat the colour of a potato, and a brown wool hat on his head. “Can I tell them who is here?” Then Babi’s hand was on Laila’s shoulder, and he gently pulled her away from the door. “Why don’t you go upstairs, Laila. Go on.” As she moved toward the steps, Laila heard the visitor say to Babi that he had news from Panjshir. Mammy was in the room now too. She had one hand covering her mouth, and her eyes were jumping from Babi to the man in the hat. Laila peeked from the top of the stairs. She watched the stranger sit down with her parents. He leaned toward them. Said a few quiet words. Then Babi’s face was white, and getting whiter, and he was looking at his hands, and Mammy was screaming, screaming, and pulling at her hair. * * * THE NEXT MORNING, the day of the funeral prayers, many women from the area came to the house and took charge of preparing for the dinner that would take place after the funeral. Mammy sat on the sofa the whole morning, her fingers moving a handkerchief, her face swollen. She was looked after by two women who were crying a little and took turns gently touching Mammy’s hand, like she was the most special and delicate doll in the world. Mammy did not seem to know they were there. Laila kneeled before her mother and took her hands. “Mammy.” Mammy’s eyes moved down. She blinked. “We’ll take care of her, dear Laila,” one of the women said, sounding important. Laila had been to funerals before where she had seen women like this, women who enjoyed everything to do with death, official helpers who did not let anyone else do the jobs they had decided to do. “It’s under control. You go on now, girl, and do something else. Leave your mother alone.” Sent away, Laila felt useless. She moved from one room to another without purpose. She spent some time in the kitchen. A quiet Hasina and her mother came. Giti and her mother also came. When Giti saw Laila, she hurried over, put her thin arms around her, and gave Laila a very long, and surprisingly strong, hug. When she pulled back, tears were in her eyes. “I am so sorry, Laila,” she said. Laila thanked her. The three girls sat outside in the garden until one of the women told them to wash glasses and put plates on the table. Babi too kept walking in and out of the house without purpose, looking, it seemed, for something to do. “Keep him away from me.” That was the only time Mammy said anything all morning. Babi ended up sitting alone on a folding chair in the hall, looking sad and small. Then one of the women told him he was in the way there. He said sorry and went into his study.

THAT AFTERNOON, the men went to a hall in Karteh-Seh that Babi had rented for the funeral prayers. The women came to the house. Laila took her place beside Mammy, next to the living-room entrance where the family of the person who died usually sits. People coming to show sadness removed their shoes at the door, nodded at people they knew as they crossed the room, and sat on folding chairs placed along the walls. Laila saw Wajma, the old woman who had helped her mother give birth to her. She saw Tariq’s mother too, wearing a black scarf over the wig. She gave Laila a nod and a slow, sad smile without opening her mouth. From a cassette player, a man’s voice sang parts of the Koran through his nose. In between, the women made sounds showing sadness and moved and sniffled. There were quiet coughs, quiet talking, and, sometimes, someone made a loud, very sad sound. Rasheed’s wife, Mariam, came in. She was wearing a black headscarf. Pieces of her hair were on her forehead. She sat along the wall across from Laila. Next to Laila, Mammy kept rocking back and forth. Laila took Mammy’s hand into her lap and held it with both of hers, but Mammy did not seem to notice. “Do you want some water, Mammy?” Laila said in her ear. “Are you thirsty?” But Mammy said nothing. She did nothing but move back and forth and stare at the rug with a distant look, like she had no spirit. Now and then, sitting next to Mammy, seeing the sad looks around the room, the size of the terrible thing that had happened to her family would become clear to Laila. The chances that were gone. The hopes that were broken. But the feeling didn’t last. It was hard to feel, really feel, Mammy’s loss. Hard to feel sad, to cry for the deaths of people Laila had never really thought of as being alive in the first place. Ahmad and Noor had always been like old stories to her. Like characters in a made-up tale. Kings in a history book. It was Tariq who was real, a living person. Tariq, who taught her bad words in Pashto, who liked salty leaves from a plant, who made a face and a quiet sound when he chewed, who had a light pink mark on his skin just below his left collarbone shaped like a musical instrument turned upside down. So she sat beside Mammy and did her duty by mourning Ahmad and Noor, but, in Laila’s heart, her true brother was alive and well.

20. The sicknesses that would trouble Mammy for the rest of her life started. Pain in her chest and head, pain in her joints and sweating at night, very strong pain in her ears, and small hard areas in her body that only she could feel. Babi took her to a doctor. The doctor took blood and pee, took pictures of her body, but found nothing wrong with her body. Mammy stayed in bed most days. She wore black clothes. She pulled at her hair and bit the small dark spot below her lip. When Mammy was awake, Laila saw her walking unsteadily through the house. Like she would see the boys if she just kept walking into the room where they used to sleep, fart, and fight with pillows. But all she saw was that they were not there. And Laila. Laila thought that for Mammy, seeing Laila was the same as seeing nothing. The only thing Mammy always did was her five daily prayers to God. She finished each prayer with her head down, hands up in front of her face, quietly asking God to help the fighters win. Laila had to do more and more of the housework. If she didn't look after the house, she would find clothes, shoes, open bags of rice, cans of food, and dirty dishes all over the place. Laila washed Mammy’s dresses and changed her bed sheets. She gently helped her get out of bed to wash and eat. She was the one who ironed Babi's shirts and folded his trousers. More and more, she was the one who cooked. Sometimes, after she finished the housework, Laila got into bed next to Mammy. She put her arms around her, held her mother's hand, and put her face in her mother's hair. Mammy would move a little and say something quietly. She would always start telling a story about the boys. One day, as they were lying like this, Mammy said, “Ahmad was going to be a leader. People liked him and wanted to follow him. People much older than him listened to him with respect, Laila. It was amazing. And oh, my Noor. He was always drawing pictures of buildings and bridges. He was going to design buildings, you know. He was going to change Kabul with the things he designed. And now they are both fighters who died, my boys, both martyrs.” Laila lay there and listened, wishing Mammy would see that she, Laila, was not dead, that she was alive, here, in bed with her, that she had dreams and a future. But Laila knew that her future was not as important as her brothers' past. They were more important than her when they were alive. They would make her seem unimportant now that they were dead. Mammy was like someone taking care of a museum about their lives. Laila was just a visitor. She was like a piece of paper where Mammy would write their stories. “The man who brought the news, he said that when they brought the boys back to the camp, Ahmad Shah Massoud himself was there for the burial. He said a prayer for them where they were buried. Your brothers were such brave young men, Laila, that Commander Massoud himself, who is a very important fighter, God bless him, was there when they were buried.” Mammy turned onto her back. Laila moved and put her head on Mammy’s chest. “Some days,” Mammy said in a rough voice, “I listen to the clock in the hall. Then I think of all the time waiting for me. All the time without them. And then I can't breathe, like someone is standing on my heart, Laila. I feel so weak. So weak I just want to fall down somewhere.” “I wish I could do something,” Laila said, and she meant it. But it sounded like something a stranger might say to be nice, not like she really felt it. “You are a good daughter,” Mammy said, breathing out deeply. “And I haven't been a very good mother to you.” “Don’t say that.” “Yes, it is true. I know it, and I am sorry, my dear.” “Mammy?” “Mm.” Laila sat up, looking down at Mammy. Mammy's hair had some gray in it now. And it surprised Laila how much weight Mammy had lost. Mammy had always been a bit fat. Her cheeks looked unhealthy and thin. The top she was wearing hung loosely over her shoulders, and there was a big space between her neck and the top of the shirt. More than once, Laila had seen Mammy's wedding ring fall off her finger. “I wanted to ask you something.” “What is it?” “You wouldn't...” Laila started. She had talked about it to Hasina. Hasina told her to, so they had put the aspirin pills in the drain outside. They had hidden the kitchen knives and the sharp metal sticks for cooking meat under the rug under the sofa. Hasina had found a rope in the garden. When Babi could not find his razors for shaving, Laila had to tell him what she was afraid of. He sat down quickly on the edge of the sofa, with his hands between his knees. Laila waited for him to say something to make her feel better. But he just looked confused and sad, like his eyes were empty. “You wouldn't... Mammy, I am worried that—” “I thought about killing myself the night we heard the news,” Mammy said. “I will tell you the truth, I have thought about it since then too. But no. Don't worry, Laila. I want to see what my sons wanted to happen. I want to see the day the Russian soldiers go home because they lost, the day the fighters come to Kabul because they won. I want to be there when it happens, when Afghanistan is free, so my sons see it too. They will see it through my eyes.” Mammy quickly fell asleep, leaving Laila with two different feelings: happy that Mammy wanted to live, but also sad that she was not the reason why. She would never be as important to Mammy as her brothers were. Mammy's heart was like a sad beach where Laila's marks would always be washed away by the waves of sadness that kept coming.

21. The driver stopped his taxi to let another long line of Russian army cars and tanks go past. Tariq leaned from the back seat, over the driver, and shouted, “Please! Please!” An army car made a loud sound with its horn, and Tariq whistled back, smiling brightly and waving happily. “Nice guns!” he shouted. “Great army cars! Great army! It's a shame you are losing to some farmers using slingshots!” The line of army cars went past. The driver drove back onto the road. “How much farther?” Laila asked. “An hour at the most,” the driver said. “If we don't see any more army cars or places where they stop cars to check.” They were going on a trip for the day, Laila, Babi, and Tariq. Hasina had asked her father many times to come too, but he said she could not go. The trip was Babi’s idea. Even though he didn't have much money from his job, he paid a driver to take them for the day. He didn't tell Laila where they were going, only that the trip would help her learn. They had been on the road since five in the morning. Through Laila’s window, the view changed from mountains with snow on top to dry areas, deep valleys, and rocky places made hot by the sun. Along the way, they passed houses made of mud with roofs made of dry grass, and fields with groups of wheat. Here and there in the dusty fields, Laila saw the black tents of people who moved from place to place. And often, the broken bodies of burned Russian tanks and destroyed helicopters. Laila thought this was the part of Afghanistan where Ahmad and Noor were. The fighting was happening here, outside the city. Not in Kabul. Kabul was mostly peaceful. Back in Kabul, if it wasn't for the sound of guns sometimes, if it wasn't for the Russian soldiers smoking on the paths and the Russian army cars always driving on the streets, it would feel like there was no war. It was late morning, after they went past two more places where the army stopped cars, when they came into a valley. Babi asked Laila to lean across the seat and showed her some old-looking red walls far away, made of mud dried in the sun. “That’s called Shahr-e-Zohak. The Red City. It was a strong building for defence before. It was built about 900 years ago to protect the valley from enemies. Genghis Khan's grandson attacked it in the 1200s, but he was killed. Then Genghis Khan himself destroyed it.” “And that, my young friends, is the story of our country, one enemy after another,” the driver said, hitting the ash from his cigarette out of the window. “People from Macedonia. People from the Sasanian Empire. Arabs. Mongols. Now the Russians. But we are like those walls up there. Damaged, and not nice to look at, but still here. That is true, isn't it, father?” “Yes, it is,” said Babi. * * * HALF AN HOUR LATER, the driver stopped the car. “Come on, you two,” Babi said. “Come outside and look.” They got out of the taxi. Babi pointed. “They are there. Look.” Tariq made a sudden sound with his breath. Laila did too.When she saw them, Laila knew she could live for a hundred years and never see anything so great again. The two Buddha statues were very big, much taller than she thought from the pictures. They were cut into a rock cliff that was white from the sun. They looked down at them, just like Laila thought they had looked down at people travelling through the valley on the Silk Road almost two thousand years ago. On both sides of the statues, the rock cliff had many caves. “I feel very small,” Tariq said.
“Do you want to climb up?” Babi said.
“Up the statues?” Laila asked. “Can we do that?”
Babi smiled and held out his hand. “Come on.”

Climbing was hard for Tariq. He had to hold Laila and Babi as they slowly went up a winding, narrow, dark staircase. On the way, they saw dark caves and tunnels going in all directions inside the cliff. “Be careful where you step,” Babi said. His voice made a loud sound back. “The ground is dangerous.” In some parts, the stairs were open to the space inside the Buddha statue.
“Don’t look down, children. Keep looking straight.”

As they climbed, Babi told them that Bamiyan was once a busy place for Buddhists until Arab Muslims took control in the 800s. Buddhist monks lived in the rock cliffs and cut caves there to live and to give a safe place to tired travellers. Babi said the monks painted beautiful pictures on the walls and roofs of their caves. “At one time,” he said, “five thousand monks lived alone in these caves.”

Tariq was very tired when they reached the top. Babi was also breathing hard. But his eyes looked bright with happiness. “We are standing on top of its head,” he said, cleaning his forehead with a cloth. “There is a place here where we can look out.” They moved slowly to the rocky edge and stood side by side, with Babi in the middle, looking down at the valley.
“Look at this!” said Laila.
Babi smiled.

The Bamiyan Valley below was covered with green farming fields. Babi said they were green wheat and other plants, and potatoes too. Small trees grew along the sides of the fields. Small rivers and water channels crossed the land. By the water, small women sat and washed clothes. Babi pointed to fields of rice and other grains on the hillsides. It was autumn, and Laila could see people in bright clothes on the roofs of houses made of mud bricks, putting out the food they had grown to dry. The main road through the town also had small trees along it. There were small shops and places to drink tea, and men cutting hair by the road. Beyond the town, past the river and streams, Laila saw hills that were bare and brown with dust. And past those, like everywhere else in Afghanistan, were the mountains with snow on top. The sky above everything was a perfect, clean blue.

“It is so quiet,” Laila whispered. She could see small sheep and horses but could not hear the sounds they made.
“That is what I always remember about being up here,” Babi said. “The silence. How peaceful it is. I wanted you to feel it. But I also wanted you to see your country’s history, children, to learn about its important past. You see, some things I can teach you. Some you learn from books. But some things, well, you just have to see and feel.”
“Look,” said Tariq.
They watched a bird flying in circles above the town.
“Did you ever bring Mammy up here?” Laila asked.
“Oh, many times. Before the boys were born. After too. Your mother, she used to be brave and like new things then, and . . . so full of life. She was the most lively, happy person I had ever met.” He smiled as he remembered. “She had a laugh. I promise you that is why I married her, Laila, for that laugh. It was so strong. You had no chance against it.” Laila felt a wave of love. From then on, she would always remember Babi like this: remembering Mammy, with his arms on the rock, his hands holding his face, his hair moved by the wind, his eyes smiling against the sun.
“I am going to look at some of those caves,” Tariq said.
“Be careful,” said Babi.
“I will, Uncle,” Tariq’s voice sounded back. Laila watched three men far below, talking near a cow tied to a fence. Around them, the trees had started to change colour, yellow and orange, bright red.
“I miss the boys too, you know,” Babi said. His eyes had become a little wet. His chin was shaking. “Maybe I am not . . . With your mother, her happiness and sadness are very strong. She cannot hide either. She never could. Me, I think I am different. I tend to . . . But it hurt me too, the boys dying. I miss them too. Not a day passes that I . . . It is very hard, Laila. So very hard.” He pressed the corners of his eyes with his thumb and finger. When he tried to talk, his voice broke. He pulled his lips over his teeth and waited. He took a long, deep breath, looked at her. “But I am happy I have you. Every day, I thank God for you. Every single day. Sometimes, when your mother is having a very sad day, I feel like you are all I have, Laila.” Laila moved closer to him and put her cheek against his chest. He seemed a little surprised – not like Mammy, he did not often show love with touching. He quickly kissed the top of her head and hugged her back in an awkward way. They stood like this for a while, looking down at the Bamiyan Valley.
“As much as I love this land, some days I think about leaving it,” Babi said.
“Where to?”
“Anywhere where it is easy to forget. Pakistan first, I think. For a year, maybe two. Wait for our papers to be ready.”
“And then?”
“And then, well, it is a big world. Maybe America. Somewhere near the sea. Like California.”
Babi said the Americans were kind people. They would help them with money and food for a while, until they could start their lives. “I would find work, and, in a few years, when we had saved enough, we would open a small Afghan restaurant. Nothing special, you see, just a simple little place, a few tables, some mats on the floor. Maybe put some pictures of Kabul on the walls. We would let the Americans try Afghan food. And with your mother’s cooking, they would stand in a long line down the street.

“And you, you would keep going to school, of course. You know how I feel about that. That would be the most important thing, to get you a good education, high school then university. But in your free time, if you wanted to, you could help, take orders from people, fill water glasses, things like that.” Babi said they would have birthday parties at the restaurant, parties for getting married, parties for the New Year. It would become a place for other Afghans who, like them, had left because of the war. And, late at night, after everyone had left and the place was clean, they would sit for tea among the empty tables, the three of them, tired but happy for their good luck. When Babi finished speaking, he became quiet. They both did. They knew that Mammy was not going anywhere. Leaving Afghanistan was something she could not imagine while Ahmad and Noor were still alive. Now that they had died in the war, packing up and running away was an even worse insult, a betrayal, not respecting the sacrifice her sons had made. How can you think of it? Laila could hear her saying. Does their dying mean nothing to you, cousin? The only comfort I find is knowing that I walk on the same ground that took their blood. No. Never.

And Babi would never leave without her, Laila knew, even though Mammy was no more a wife to him now than she was a mother to Laila. For Mammy, he would put away this dream of his like he brushed off dust from his coat when he came home from work. And so they would stay. They would stay until the war ended. And they would stay for whatever came after war. Laila remembered Mammy telling Babi once that she had married a man who had no strong beliefs. Mammy did not understand. She did not understand that if she looked in a mirror, she would see the one thing he always believed in looking back at her.

LATER, after they had eaten lunch of boiled eggs and potatoes with bread, Tariq slept under a tree by a stream that was making noise. He slept with his coat folded like a pillow, his hands crossed on his chest. The driver went to the town to buy nuts. Babi sat at the bottom of a thick tree reading a book. Laila knew the book; he had read it to her once. It told the story of an old fisherman named Santiago who catches a very big fish. But by the time he sails his boat back to safety, there is nothing left of his great fish; the sharks have eaten it. Laila sat on the edge of the stream, putting her feet in the cool water. Above, small flying insects made noise and white seeds from trees danced in the air. A flying insect called a dragonfly made a sound nearby. Laila watched its wings catch the sunlight as it moved from one piece of grass to another. They flashed purple, then green, orange. Across the stream, a group of boys from the Hazara people were picking up dry cow dung from the ground and putting it into bags tied to their backs. Somewhere, a donkey made a loud sound. A machine started working. Laila thought again about Babi’s small dream. Somewhere near the sea.

There was something she had not told Babi up there on top of the Buddha: that, in one important way, she was happy they could not go. She would miss Giti and her serious face, yes, and Hasina too, with her funny laugh and wild playing. But, most of all, Laila remembered very well how boring and hard those four weeks were without Tariq when he had gone to a place called Ghazni. She remembered very well how slowly time went without him, how she had walked around feeling lost and not right. How could she ever live without him being there all the time? Maybe it was silly to want to be near a person so much here in a country where bullets had killed her own brothers. But all Laila had to do was think about Tariq fighting Khadim with his leg and then nothing in the world seemed more right to her.

SIX MONTHS LATER, in April 1988, Babi came home with big news.
“They signed an agreement!” he said. “In Geneva. It is official! They are leaving. In nine months, there will be no more Soviet soldiers in Afghanistan!” Mammy was sitting up in bed. She moved her shoulders.
“But the government controlled by the communists is staying,” she said. “Najibullah is the leader controlled by the Soviets. He is not going anywhere. No, the war will continue. This is not the end.”
“Najibullah will not stay long,” said Babi.
“They are leaving, Mammy! They are really leaving!”
“You two celebrate if you want to. But I will not rest until the Mujahideen have a celebration walk right here in Kabul.”
And, with that, she lay down again and pulled the blanket up.

JANUARY 1989

One cold, grey day in January 1989, three months before Laila turned eleven, she, her parents, and Hasina went to watch one of the last groups of Soviet army vehicles leave the city. People who came to watch had gathered on both sides of the main road near the Military Club near Wazir Akbar Khan. They stood in muddy snow and watched the line of tanks, army trucks, and jeeps as light snow fell across the bright light of the passing lights. People shouted rude things. Afghan soldiers kept people off the street. Sometimes, they had to shoot their guns in the air to warn people. Mammy held up a photo of Ahmad and Noor high over her head. It was the one of them sitting back-to-back under the pear tree. There were others like her, women with pictures of their husbands, sons, brothers who had died in the war, held high. Someone touched Laila and Hasina on the shoulder. It was Tariq.
“Where did you get that thing?” Hasina said loudly.
“I thought I would come dressed for this time,” Tariq said. He was wearing a very big Russian hat made of fur, with parts that covered the ears, which he had pulled down. “How do I look?”
“Silly,” Laila laughed.
“That’s the idea.”
“Your parents came here with you dressed like this?”
“They are at home, actually,” he said.

Last autumn, Tariq’s uncle in Ghazni had died from a heart problem, and, a few weeks later, Tariq’s father had a heart problem himself. This made him weak and tired, and he was often worried and sad for weeks at a time. Laila was happy to see Tariq like this, like his old self again. For weeks after his father was ill, Laila had watched him looking sad, with a heavy face and unhappy. The three of them went away quietly while Mammy and Babi stood watching the Soviets. From a man selling food on the street, Tariq bought them each a plate of boiled beans with a thick green sauce on top. They ate under the cover of a closed rug shop. Then Hasina went to find her family. On the bus ride home, Tariq and Laila sat behind her parents. Mammy was by the window, looking out, holding the picture close to her chest. Beside her, Babi was listening without showing his feelings to a man who was saying strongly that the Soviets might be leaving but that they would send weapons to Najibullah in Kabul. “He is their puppet. They will keep the war going through him, you can be sure of that.” Someone in the seat next to them said they agreed. Mammy was talking quietly to herself, saying long prayers that went on and on until she had no breath left and had to say the last few words in a very small, high sound.

THEY WENT TO Cinema Park later that day, Laila and Tariq, and had to watch a Soviet film that had voices added in Farsi, which made it funny by accident. There was a trade ship, and a man who was second in command in love with the captain’s daughter. Her name was Alyona. Then came a bad storm, lightning, rain, the rough sea shaking the ship. One of the scared sailors yelled something. A very calm Afghan voice translated: “My dear sir, would you please pass the rope?” When he heard this, Tariq started laughing loudly. And, soon, they were both laughing so hard they could not stop. Just when one was tired, the other would make a sound like a pig, and off they would go again. A man sitting two rows in front turned around and told them to be quiet. There was a wedding scene near the end. The captain had said yes and let Alyona marry the second in command. The new husband and wife were smiling at each other. Everyone was drinking a strong drink. “I am never getting married,” Tariq whispered. “Me neither,” said Laila, but not before she waited for a moment, feeling nervous. She worried that her voice had shown she was disappointed by what he had said. Her heart beating fast, she added, more strongly this time, “Never.”
“Weddings are silly.”
“All the fuss.”
“All the money spent.”
“For what?”
“For clothes you will never wear again.”
“Ha!”
“If I ever do get married,” Tariq said, “they will have to make space for three on the wedding stage. Me, the bride, and the man holding the gun to my head.” The man in the front row gave them another look telling them to stop. On the screen, Alyona and her new husband kissed. Watching the kiss, Laila felt strange because people might look at her. She became very aware of her heart beating, of the blood making noise in her ears, of the shape of Tariq beside her, getting stiff and not moving. The kiss continued. It seemed very important to Laila, suddenly, that she did not move or make a noise. She felt that Tariq was watching her—one eye on the kiss, the other on her—just as she was watching him. Was he listening to the air going in and out of her nose, she wondered, waiting for a small change, something wrong, that would show what she was thinking? And what would it be like to kiss him, to feel the soft hair above his lip touching her own lips? Then Tariq moved uncomfortably in his seat. In a voice that sounded tight, he said, “Did you know that if you throw snot in Siberia, it is a green frozen drop before it hits the ground?” They both laughed, but for a short time, feeling nervous, this time. And when the film ended and they stepped outside, Laila was happy to see that the sky had become darker, that she would not have to look into Tariq’s eyes in the bright daylight.

APRIL 1992

Three years passed. In that time, Tariq’s father had many heart problems. They left him with a hand that did not work well and he spoke a little unclear. When he was angry, which happened often, his unclear speaking got worse. Tariq grew too tall for his leg again and was given a new leg by the Red Cross, though he had to wait six months for it.

As Hasina had been afraid of, her family took her to Lahore, where she was made to marry the cousin who owned the car repair shop. The morning that they took her, Laila and Giti went to Hasina’s house to say good-bye. Hasina told them that the cousin, the man she would marry, had already started the plan to move them to Germany, where his brothers lived. In less than a year, she thought, they would be in Frankfurt. They cried then in a hug together. Giti was very sad. The last time Laila ever saw Hasina, her father was helping her into the full back seat of a taxi.

The Soviet Union broke up with surprising speed. Every few weeks, it seemed to Laila, Babi was coming home with news of the newest country to say it was free. Lithuania. Estonia. Ukraine. The Soviet flag was taken down over the Kremlin. The country of Russia was born. In Kabul, Najibullah changed his plans and tried to look like a good Muslim. “Too little and too late,” said Babi. “You cannot be the head of the secret police one day and the next day pray in a mosque with people whose family you hurt and killed.” Feeling like he was trapped in Kabul, Najibullah tried to make peace with the Mujahideen but the Mujahideen said no. From her bed, Mammy said, “Good for them.” She kept watching and waiting for the Mujahideen and waited for her celebration walk. Waited for the people who killed her sons to lose.

AND, finally, they did. In April 1992, the year Laila turned fourteen. Najibullah finally gave up and was given a safe place in the UN building near Darulaman Palace, south of the city. The holy war was finished. The different communist governments that had been in power since the night Laila was born were all defeated. Mammy’s heroes, Ahmad’s and Noor’s friends in the war, had won. And now, after more than ten years of giving up everything, of leaving their families to live in the mountains and fight for Afghanistan to be free, the Mujahideen were coming to Kabul, real people, tired from fighting. Mammy knew all of their names. There was Dostum, the colourful leader from Uzbekistan, leader of the Junbish-i-Milli group, who was known for changing sides. The serious, unfriendly Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Hezb-e-Islami group, a Pashtun who had studied engineering and once killed a student who followed Mao. Rabbani, a Tajik leader of the Jamiat-e-Islami group, who had taught about Islam at Kabul University in the days when there was a king. Sayyaf, a Pashtun from Paghman who knew Arabs, a strong Muslim and leader of the Ittehad-i-Islami group. Abdul Ali Mazari, leader of the Hizb-e-Wahdat group, called Baba Mazari by other Hazaras, with strong connections to Iran. And, of course, there was Mammy’s hero, Rabbani’s friend, the serious, interesting Tajik commander Ahmad Shah Massoud, the Lion of Panjshir. Mammy had put up a poster of him in her room. Massoud’s good-looking, thinking face, one eyebrow raised and his special hat on one side, would be seen everywhere in Kabul. His deep black eyes would look back from big signs, walls, shop windows, from small flags on taxi antennas. For Mammy, this was the day she had wished for. This made all those years of waiting mean something. At last, she could stop watching and waiting, and her sons could rest in peace.

THE DAY AFTER Najibullah gave up, Mammy got out of bed like a new woman. For the first time in the five years since Ahmad and Noor had died in the war, she did not wear black. She put on a dark blue dress with white dots. She cleaned the windows, cleaned the floor, let fresh air into the house, had a long wash. Her voice was loud with happiness. “We should have a party,” she said loudly. She sent Laila to ask the neighbors. “Tell them we are having a big lunch tomorrow!” In the kitchen, Mammy stood looking around, hands on her hips, and said, in a kind but blaming way, “What have you done to my kitchen, Laila? Oh no. Everything is in a different place.” She began moving pots and pans around, like on a stage, as though she were saying they were hers again, claiming her space again, now that she was back. Laila stayed away from her. It was the best thing to do. Mammy could be as strong in her times of great happiness as in her times of great anger. With strange energy, Mammy started cooking: soup with beans and herbs, small meat balls, hot dumplings with yogurt and mint on top. “You are shaping your eyebrows,” Mammy said, as she was opening a big bag of rice by the kitchen counter. “Only a little.” Mammy poured rice from the bag into a big black pot of water. She pushed up her sleeves and began mixing. “How is Tariq?” “His father has not been well,” Laila said. “How old is he now?” “I don’t know. Around sixty, I guess.” “I meant Tariq.” “Oh. Sixteen.” “He is a nice boy. Don’t you think?” Laila moved her shoulders. “He is not really a boy anymore, though, is he? Sixteen. Almost a man. Don’t you think?” “What are you trying to say, Mammy?” “Nothing,” Mammy said, smiling in a way that showed she knew something. “Nothing. It is just that you . . . Oh, nothing. I should not say anyway.” “I can see you want to,” Laila said, feeling annoyed by this round-about, teasing way of blaming her. “Well.” Mammy put her hands on the edge of the pot. Laila saw that the way she said “Well” and the way she put her hands was not natural, like she had practiced it. She was afraid a long talk was coming. “It was one thing when you were small children running around. No problem with that. It was sweet. But now. Now. I see you wear a bra, Laila.” Laila was surprised. “And you could have told me, by the way, about the bra. I did not know. I am sad you did not tell me.” Feeling she had an advantage, Mammy continued speaking strongly. “Anyway, this is not about me or the bra. It is about you and Tariq. He is a boy, you see, and because of that, what does he care about what people think? But you? What people think about a girl, especially a pretty one like you, is a sensitive thing, Laila. Like a small bird in your hands. If you hold it loosely, it flies away.” “And what about when you climbed walls, going secretly with Babi in the fruit gardens?” Laila said, happy she could answer quickly. “We were family. And we got married. Has this boy asked to marry you?” “He is a friend. A close friend. It is not like that between us,” Laila said, sounding like she was defending herself, and not very believable. “He is like a brother to me,” she added, but it was the wrong thing to say. And she knew, even before Mammy’s face became sad and her face got dark, that she had made a mistake. “He is not that,” Mammy said with no feeling. “You will not compare that boy with one leg, whose father is a carpenter, to your brothers. There is no one like your brothers.” “I did not say he . . . That is not what I meant.” Mammy breathed out through her nose and closed her teeth tightly. “Anyway,” she started again, but without the teasing happy way, “what I am trying to say is that if you are not careful, people will talk.” Laila opened her mouth to say something. It was true that Mammy had a point. Laila knew that the time of playing simply and freely in the streets with Tariq was finished. For some time now, Laila had started to feel something new and strange when they were outside. A feeling that people were looking at them, checking them, whispering about them, that Laila had never felt before. And would not feel even now except for one main reason: She had fallen in love with Tariq. Completely and strongly. When he was near, she could not help but think very wrong thoughts, of his thin, bare body with hers. Lying in bed at night, she thought of him kissing her stomach, wondered how soft his lips were, how his hands would feel on her neck, her chest, her back, and lower. She felt very guilty, but also a strange, warm feeling that went up from her stomach until it felt like her face was red and glowing. No. Mammy was right. More than she knew, actually. Laila thought that some, maybe most, of the neighbors were already talking about her and Tariq. Laila had seen the secret smiles, knew about the whispers in the neighborhood that the two of them were a couple. For example, the other day, she and Tariq were walking up the street together when they passed Rasheed, the man who made shoes, with his wife Mariam, who wore a burqa, following him. As he walked past them, Rasheed said in a joking way, “Look, it is Laili and Majnoon,” talking about the famous lovers who had bad luck from Nezami’s well-known love poem from the 1100s—a version of Romeo and Juliet in Farsi, Babi said, though he added that Nezami wrote his story of lovers who had bad luck four hundred years before Shakespeare. Mammy had a point. What made Laila angry was that Mammy had not earned the right to say it. It would have been okay if Babi had talked about this. But Mammy? All those years of staying away, of staying alone inside and not caring where Laila went and who she saw and what she thought . . . It was not fair. Laila felt like she was worth no more than these pots and pans, something that could be forgotten, then taken back, just like that, whenever she wanted. But this was a big day, an important day, for all of them. It would be small-minded to ruin it because of this. Wanting to keep the good feeling, Laila did not argue. “I understand what you mean,” she said. “Good!” Mammy said. “That is settled, then. Now, where is Hakim? Where, oh where, is my dear little husband?”

IT WAS A very bright, clear day, perfect for a party. The men sat on weak folding chairs in the garden. They smoked and talked loudly in a joking way about the Mujahideen’s plan. From Babi, Laila had learned the main points of it: Afghanistan was now called the Islamic State of Afghanistan. An Islamic group council, started in Peshawar by some of the Mujahideen groups, would manage things for two months, led by Sibghatullah Mojadidi. This would be followed then by a council of leaders led by Rabbani, who would be in charge for four months. During those six months, a big meeting of leaders and older people would happen, who would form a temporary government to be in power for two years, before people vote in elections. One of the men was waving air onto meat on sticks cooking over a simple fire. Babi and Tariq’s father were playing chess in the shade of the old pear tree. Their faces were serious, showing they were thinking hard. Tariq was sitting by the game too, sometimes watching the game, then listening to the talk about politics at the table next to them. The women were together in the living room, the hall, and the kitchen. They talked to each other as they lifted their babies and moved well to avoid, with small movements of their hips, the children running fast after each other around the house. Music from a tape player was loud. Laila was in the kitchen, making drinks with yogurt and water with Giti. Giti was no longer as shy, or as serious, as before. For several months now, the frown she always had was gone from her face. She laughed openly now, more often, and—Laila noticed—in a way that showed she liked boys a bit. She had stopped wearing the plain ponytails, let her hair grow, and put red colour in it. Laila found out later that the reason for this change was a boy of eighteen whose attention Giti had caught. His name was Sabir, and he played in goal for Giti’s older brother’s football team. “Oh, he has such a good smile, and this very thick black hair!” Giti had told Laila. No one knew they liked each other, of course. Giti had secretly met him two times for tea, for fifteen minutes each time, at a small teahouse on the other side of town, in Taimani. “He is going to ask my family if he can marry me, Laila! Maybe as early as this summer. Can you believe it? I promise I cannot stop thinking about him.” “What about school?” Laila had asked. Giti had moved her head to the side and looked at her like We both know that won’t happen. By the time we are twenty, Hasina used to say, Giti and I, we will have had four or five children each. But you, Laila, you will make us two silly people proud. You are going to be someone important. I know one day I will read a newspaper and see your picture on the first page. Giti was next to Laila now, cutting cucumbers, looking like she was dreaming about something far away. Mammy was close by, in her bright summer dress, peeling eggs that had been boiled with Wajma, the woman who helps with births, and Tariq’s mother. “I am going to give Commander Massoud a picture of Ahmad and Noor,” Mammy was telling Wajma as Wajma nodded and tried to look like she cared and was honest. “He was there when they were buried. He said a prayer at their grave. It will be a small gift to thank him for being kind.” Mammy cracked another boiled egg. “I hear he is a man who thinks carefully and is good. I think he would like it.” All around them, women ran quickly in and out of the kitchen, carried out bowls of stew, plates of rice with meat, loaves of bread, and put it all on the cloth on the floor spread out on the living-room floor. Every now and then, Tariq walked in slowly. He took small pieces of this and that. “No men allowed,” said Giti. “Go out, go out, go out,” shouted Wajma. Tariq smiled at the women telling him to leave in a friendly way. He seemed happy that he was not welcome here, changing this place for women with his half-smiling, male disrespect. Laila tried hard not to look at him, not to give these women more things to talk about than they already had. So she kept her eyes looking down and said nothing to him, but she remembered a dream she had had a few nights before, of his face and hers, together in a mirror, under a soft, green cover. And small pieces of rice, falling from his hair, bouncing off the glass with a small sound. Tariq reached to taste a piece of meat cooked with potatoes. “Hey boy!” Giti hit the back of his hand. Tariq took it anyway and laughed. He was almost a foot taller than Laila now. He shaved his face. His face was thinner, with stronger lines. His shoulders were wider. Tariq liked to wear trousers with folds, black shiny shoes, and shirts with short sleeves that showed his new strong arms—thanks to an old, rusty set of weights that he lifted every day in his garden. His face had recently started to show a look of playful arguing. He had started to tilt his head in a way that showed he knew people were watching, slightly to the side, and lifting one eyebrow when he laughed. He let his hair get long and often moved his long hair even when he did not need to. The slightly bad half smile was also new. The last time Tariq was told to leave the kitchen, his mother saw Laila looking quickly at him. Laila’s heart beat fast, and her eyes moved quickly because she felt guilty. She quickly made herself busy tossing the cut cucumber into the container of yogurt mixed with salt and water. But she could feel Tariq’s mother watching, her smile showed she knew and approved. The men filled their plates and cups and took their food to the garden. Once they had taken their food, the women and children sat on the floor around the cloth and ate. It was after the cloth was cleaned and the plates were put in the kitchen, when the busy time of making tea and remembering who wanted green and who wanted black started, that Tariq made a sign with his head and went out the door quietly. Laila waited five minutes, then followed. She found him three houses down the street, leaning against the wall at the start of a small, narrow street between two houses next to each other. He was singing an old song in Pashto, by Ustad Awal Mir:
Da ze ma ziba watan, da ze ma dada watan.
This is our beautiful land, this is our beloved land.

And he was smoking, another new thing he did, which he had started doing because of the boys Laila saw him with these days. Laila could not stand them, these new friends of Tariq’s. They all dressed the same way, trousers with folds, and tight shirts that showed their arms and chest. They all wore too much perfume, and they all smoked. They walked around the neighborhood in groups in a proud way, telling jokes, laughing loudly, sometimes even calling out to girls, with the same silly, happy-with-themselves smiles on their faces. One of Tariq’s friends, because he looked a little like Sylvester Stallone, said people had to call him Rambo. “Your mother would kill you if she knew you were smoking,” Laila said, looking one way, then the other, before going into the alley quietly. “But she does not,” he said. He moved to the side to give her space. “That could change.” “Who is going to tell her? You?” Laila tapped her foot. “Tell your secret to the wind, but do not be angry at the wind for telling the trees.” Tariq smiled, the one eyebrow raised. “Who said that?” “Khalil Gibran.” “You like to show what you know.” “Give me a cigarette.” He moved his head to say no and put his arms across his chest. This was a new way he stood: back against the wall, arms crossed, cigarette hanging from the side of his mouth, his good leg bent easily. “Why not?” “It is bad for you,” he said. “And it is not bad for you?” “I do it for the girls.” “What girls?” He smiled in a way that showed he thought he was better. “They think it is attractive.” “It is not.” “No?” “I promise you.” “Not attractive?” “You look silly, like you do not think well.” “That hurts,” he said. “What girls anyway?” “You are jealous.” “I am curious, but I do not really care.” “You cannot be both.” He took air in from the cigarette again and looked with narrow eyes through the smoke. “I bet they are talking about us now.” In Laila’s mind, Mammy’s voice was loud. Like a small bird in your hands. If you hold it loosely, it flies away. Guilt hurt her like teeth biting. Then Laila stopped Mammy’s voice. Instead, she enjoyed the way Tariq had said us. How exciting, how like a secret plan, it sounded when he said it. And how it made her feel safe to hear him say it like that—simply, naturally. Us. It showed their connection, made it clear. “And what are they saying?” “That we are going on a boat trip down the River of Bad Things,” he said. “Eating a piece of the Cake of Not Respecting God.” “Riding the Taxi of Evil?” Laila added. “Making the Stew of Not Respecting Holy Things.” They both laughed. Then Tariq said that her hair was getting longer. “It is nice,” he said. Laila hoped her face was not red. “You changed the subject.” “From what?” “The silly girls who think you are attractive.” “You know.” “Know what?” “That I only look at you.” Laila felt very happy inside. She tried to understand what his face meant but saw a look that was hard to understand: the happy, silly smile did not fit with the narrow, slightly sad look in his eyes. A smart look, planned to be exactly between making fun and being serious. Tariq put out his cigarette with the back of his good foot. “So what do you think about all this?” “The party?” “Who is the silly one now? I meant the Mujahideen, Laila. Their coming to Kabul.” “Oh.” She started to tell him something Babi had said, about the difficult mix of guns and pride, when she heard noise coming from the house. Loud voices. Screaming. Laila started running. Tariq walked quickly behind her because of his leg. There was a fight in the garden. In the middle were two angry men, rolling on the ground, a knife between them. Laila knew one of them as a man from the table who had been talking about politics earlier. The other was the man who had been waving air onto the meat. Several men were trying to pull them apart. Babi was not among them. He stood by the wall, far enough from the fight, with Tariq’s father, who was crying. From the excited voices around her, Laila heard small pieces that she put together: The man at the politics table, a Pashtun, had called Ahmad Shah Massoud a traitor for making a deal with the Soviets in the 1980s. The meat man, a Tajik, had felt insulted and asked him to take back what he said. The Pashtun had refused. The Tajik had said that if Massoud had not been there, the other man’s sister would still be “sleeping with” Soviet soldiers. They had started fighting with fists. One of them had then shown a knife; people did not agree on who. With fear, Laila saw that Tariq had jumped into the fight. She also saw that some of the men trying to stop the fight were now hitting people too. She thought she saw a second knife. Later that evening, Laila thought about how the fight had fallen over, with men falling on top of each other, among shouts and cries and noise and hitting, and, in the middle of it, Tariq making a face because of pain, his hair messy, his leg had come off, trying to get out.

IT WAS surprising how quickly everything went wrong. The group of leaders was formed too early. It chose Rabbani as president. The other groups said it was unfair because he chose family or friends. Massoud asked for peace and patience. Hekmatyar, who was not included, was very angry. The Hazaras, who had been treated badly and forgotten for a long time, were very angry. People shouted insults. People pointed fingers. People made accusations. Meetings were cancelled because people were angry and doors were shut hard. The city waited nervously. In the mountains, bullets were put into guns. The Mujahideen, with lots of weapons, but now had no shared enemy, found that they were enemies of each other. Kabul had to face its problems at last.

And when the rockets started to fall on Kabul like rain, people ran to find safe places. Mammy did too, she really did. She changed back into black clothes, went to her room, closed the curtains, and pulled the blanket over her head.

“It’s the whistling,” Laila said to Tariq, “the horrible sound, I hate more than anything.” Tariq moved his head up and down to show he understood. It was not so much the sound itself, Laila thought later, but the seconds between when it started and when it hit. The short and endless time of feeling like you are hanging in the air. Not knowing. Waiting. Like a person in court waiting to hear if they are guilty. Often it happened during dinner, when she and Babi were eating. When it started, their heads looked up fast. They listened to the sound, forks stopped in the air, food still in their mouths. Laila saw the reflection of their faces, lit by only a little light, in the very dark window, their shapes not moving on the wall. The sound. Then the explosion, luckily far away, followed by breathing out and knowing that they were safe for now while somewhere else, among crying and thick smoke, people were running quickly, digging with their bare hands in a wild way, pulling from the broken buildings, what was left of a sister, a brother, a grandchild. But the other side of being safe was the pain of wondering who was not safe. After every rocket explosion, Laila ran fast to the street, saying a prayer without speaking clearly, sure that, this time, really this time, it was Tariq they would find buried under the broken pieces and smoke. At night, Laila lay in bed and watched the sudden white lights reflected in her window. She listened to the sound of machine guns firing fast and counted the rockets making a high sound above them as the house shook and small pieces of the ceiling fell on her like rain. Some nights, when the light from the rockets was so bright a person could read a book by it, she could not sleep. And, if she did, Laila’s dreams were full of fire and body parts that were separated and the sound of people who were hurt making noise. Morning did not bring relief. The call to prayer from the mosque sounded, and the Mujahideen put down their guns, turned west, and prayed. Then the mats were folded, the guns were made ready, and the mountains fired at Kabul, and Kabul fired back at the mountains, as Laila and the rest of the city watched as helpless as old Santiago watching the sharks eating his prize fish.

EVERYWHERE LAILA WENT, she saw Massoud’s men. She saw them walk around the streets and every few hundred meters stop cars to ask questions. They sat and smoked on top of tanks, wearing their army clothes and the hats they all wore. They looked quickly at people walking by from behind piles of sandbags at where roads crossed. Not that Laila went out much anymore. And, when she did, Tariq was always with her, who seemed to like doing this job like a knight. “I bought a gun,” he said one day. They were sitting outside, on the ground under the pear tree in Laila’s garden. He showed her. He said it was a type of gun that shoots many times, a Beretta. To Laila, it just looked black and dangerous. “I do not like it,” she said. “Guns make me scared.” Tariq turned the part that holds bullets in his hand. “They found three dead bodies in a house in Karteh-Seh last week,” he said. “Did you hear? Sisters. All three were attacked. Their necks were cut. Someone had bitten the rings off their fingers. You could see, there were teeth marks—” “I do not want to hear this.” “I do not mean to make you sad,” Tariq said. “But I just . . . I feel safer carrying this.” He was her connection to what was happening in the streets now. He heard the news people told each other and told it to her. Tariq was the one who told her, for example, that soldiers in the mountains practiced shooting better—and made bets about who could shoot best—by shooting people down below, men, women, children, chosen by chance. He told her that they fired rockets at cars but, for some reason, did not fire at taxis—this helped Laila understand why many people had recently painted their cars yellow. Tariq explained to her the dangerous, changing borders inside Kabul.Laila learned things from him. For example, she learned that the road up to the second tree on the left belonged to one powerful fighter, called a warlord. The next four blocks, ending at the bakery next to the broken pharmacy, belonged to another warlord. If she crossed that street and went half a mile west, she would be in the area of a different warlord, and it would be easy for snipers to shoot her. These powerful fighters were now called warlords. Laila also heard them called 'tofangdar', which means riflemen. Some people still called them Mujahideen, but they made a face that showed they really disliked the word. It sounded like an insult. Tariq put the part with bullets back into his gun.

"Can you do it?" Laila asked.

"Do what?"

"Use this gun. Kill someone with it."

Tariq put the gun in his trousers. Then he said something that was both nice and sad. "For you," he said. "I would kill with it for you, Laila."

He moved closer to her. Their hands touched, then touched again. When Tariq's fingers slowly went into hers, Laila let them. And when he suddenly leaned over and kissed her lips, she let him again. At that moment, everything Mammy said about what people thought and about birds seemed unimportant to Laila. Even silly. With all the killing and stealing, all the bad things happening, it felt harmless to sit here under a tree and kiss Tariq. It was a small thing. Something easy to forgive herself for doing. So she let him kiss her. When he moved back, she leaned in and kissed him. Her heart was beating very fast, her face felt warm, and she had a strong feeling inside her stomach.

In June 1992, there was heavy fighting in West Kabul. It was between the Pashtun fighters led by the warlord Sayyaf and the Hazara fighters of the Wahdat group. The bombs broke the power lines and destroyed whole blocks of shops and houses. Laila heard that Pashtun soldiers were attacking Hazara homes, going inside and shooting whole families to kill them. And Hazaras were fighting back by taking Pashtun people by force, hurting Pashtun girls, bombing Pashtun areas, and killing anyone they saw. Every day, bodies were found tied to trees, sometimes burned so badly they couldn't be recognized. Often, they had been shot in the head, their eyes taken out, and their tongues cut off.

Babi tried again to get Mammy to leave Kabul. "They will fix it," Mammy said. "This fighting will not last. They will sit down and find a solution."

"Fariba, these people only know war," Babi said. "They learned to walk with a milk bottle in one hand and a gun in the other."

"Who are you to say that?" Mammy replied strongly. "Did you fight in the holy war? Did you leave everything you had and risk your life? If it wasn't for the Mujahideen, we would still be servants to the Soviets, remember. And now you want us to turn against them!"

"We are not turning against them, Fariba."

"Then you go. Take your daughter and run away. Send me a postcard. But peace is coming, and I will wait for it."

The streets became so dangerous that Babi did something he really didn't want to do: He made Laila stop going to school. He taught her himself at home. Laila went into his study room every day after the sun went down. While Hekmatyar was firing rockets at Massoud from the edge of the city to the south, Babi and she talked about poems by Hafez and the loved Afghan poet Ustad Khalilullah Khalili. Babi taught her maths, like how to solve equations and draw graphs. When he was teaching, Babi changed. In his study with his books, he seemed taller to Laila. His voice was calmer and deeper, and he didn't blink as much. Laila imagined him as he was before, cleaning his board smoothly, looking over a student's work, like a kind and caring father. But it was hard for Laila to pay attention. She kept thinking about other things.

"What is the area of a pyramid?" Babi would ask. But Laila could only think about Tariq's lips, the warm feeling of his breath on her mouth, and seeing herself in his light brown eyes. She had kissed him two more times since the first time under the tree. These kisses were longer, stronger, and she thought, less awkward. Both times, she met him secretly in the dark alley where he had smoked a cigarette the day of Mammy's party. The second time, she let him touch her chest. "Laila?"

"Yes, Babi."

"Pyramid. Area. Where are you?"

"Sorry, Babi. I was, um... Let me see. Pyramid. Pyramid. One-third of the area of the bottom part times the height."

Babi nodded slowly, looking at her. Laila thought about Tariq's hands, holding her chest, moving down her back, while they kissed again and again.

One day in that same month, June, Giti was walking home from school with two friends. Only three blocks from Giti's house, a rocket hit the girls. Later that terrible day, Laila heard that Nila, Giti's mother, had run up and down the street where Giti was killed. She was picking up pieces of her daughter's body in her apron, screaming loudly because she was so upset. Giti's right foot, which was no longer fresh, still in its sock and purple shoe, was found on a roof two weeks later. At the prayer service for Giti the day after she died, Laila sat very still in a room full of women crying. This was the first time someone Laila knew well, was close to, and loved, had died. She couldn't believe that Giti was not alive anymore. Giti, with whom Laila had passed secret notes in class, whose fingernails she had painted, whose hair on her chin she had pulled out with small tools. Giti, who was going to marry Sabir the goalkeeper. Giti was dead. Dead. Blown into pieces. Finally, Laila started to cry for her friend. And all the tears she couldn't cry at her brothers' funeral came out.

Laila could hardly move, like cement had become hard in all her joints. There was a conversation happening, and Laila knew she was part of it, but she felt far away, like she was just listening secretly. As Tariq talked, Laila saw her life like an old rope, breaking, coming apart, the threads separating, falling away. It was a hot, wet afternoon in August 1992. They were in the living room of Laila's house. Mammy had had a stomach ache all day. A few minutes before, even with the rockets Hekmatyar was firing from the south, Babi had taken her to see a doctor. And now Tariq was here, sitting next to Laila on the sofa, looking at the floor, his hands between his knees. Saying that he was leaving. Not just the area. Not just Kabul. But Afghanistan completely.

Leaving.

Laila felt like she couldn't see.

"Where? Where will you go?"

"Pakistan first. Peshawar. Then I don't know. Maybe India. Iran."

"How long?"

"I don't know."

"I mean, how long have you known?"

"A few days. I was going to tell you, Laila, I promise, but I couldn't. I knew you would be so upset."

"When?"

"Tomorrow."

"Tomorrow?"

"Laila, look at me."

"Tomorrow."

"It's my father. His heart can't take it anymore, all this fighting and killing."

Laila put her face in her hands. A feeling of fear filled her chest. She should have known this would happen, she thought. Almost everyone she knew had packed their things and left. The area was almost empty of people she knew. Now, only four months after the fighting started between the Mujahideen groups, Laila hardly recognized anyone on the streets. Hasina's family had left in May, going to Tehran. Wajma and her family had gone to Islamabad in the same month. Giti's parents and her brothers and sisters left in June, soon after Giti was killed. Laila didn't know where they had gone – she heard people saying they had gone to Mashad, in Iran. After people left, their homes were empty for a few days. Then either soldiers took them, or strangers moved in. Everyone was leaving. And now Tariq too.

"And my mother is not young anymore," he was saying. "They are so afraid all the time. Laila, look at me."

"You should have told me."

"Please look at me."

Laila made a low sound. Then a cry. And then she was crying. When he tried to wipe her cheek with his thumb, she pushed his hand away. It was selfish and not logical, but she was very angry with him for leaving her. Tariq, who felt like a part of her, whose shadow was next to hers in every memory. How could he leave her? She hit him. Then she hit him again and pulled his hair. He had to hold her wrists. He was saying something she couldn't understand. He was saying it softly, calmly. And somehow, they ended up forehead to forehead, nose to nose. She could feel his warm breath on her lips again. And when he suddenly leaned in, she did too.

In the days and weeks after, Laila would try very hard to remember everything that happened next. Like someone who loves art running out of a museum that is burning, she would grab whatever she could – a look, a quiet word, a sound – to save it from disappearing, to keep it. But time is the cruellest fire, and in the end, she couldn't save everything. Still, she had these things: that first, big feeling of pain down below. The angle of the sunlight on the rug. Her foot touching the cold, hard feeling of his leg, lying next to them, his artificial leg quickly taken off. Her hands holding his elbows. The upside-down mark like a musical instrument under his collarbone, looking red. His face above hers. His black curly hair hanging down, touching her lips, her chin. The fear that they would be found. The disbelief that they were so brave, so daring. The strange and special pleasure, mixed with the pain. And the look, the many different looks, on Tariq's face: worry, kindness, apology, feeling awkward, but mostly, mostly, wanting her.

Afterwards, there was a hurry. Shirts quickly buttoned, belts fastened, hair fixed with fingers. They sat, then. They sat next to each other, smelling of each other, their faces red, both of them very surprised, both of them unable to speak about how big what had just happened was. What they had done. Laila saw three drops of blood on the rug, her blood. She imagined her parents sitting on this sofa later, not knowing about the wrong thing she had done. And then the shame started, and the guilt. Upstairs, the clock ticked on, seeming very loud to Laila. Like a judge's hammer hitting again and again, saying she was guilty. Then Tariq said, "Come with me."

For a moment, Laila almost believed it was possible. She, Tariq, and his parents, leaving together. Packing their bags, getting on a bus, leaving all this violence behind, going to find good things, or problems, and whatever happened, they would face it together. The terrible feeling of being alone that was waiting for her, the very bad loneliness, it didn't have to happen. She could go. They could be together. They would have more afternoons like this.

"I want to marry you, Laila."

For the first time since they were on the floor, she looked up at his face. She looked closely at his face. There was no joking this time. His look was full of strong belief, honest and very serious. "Tariq—"

"Let me marry you, Laila. Today. We could get married today."

He started to say more, about going to a mosque, finding a religious leader, two people to witness, a quick marriage ceremony... But Laila was thinking of Mammy, as stubborn and unwilling to change as the fighters, the air around her full of anger and sadness. And she was thinking of Babi, who had given up a long time ago, who was such a sad, weak person against Mammy. Sometimes... I feel like you're all I have, Laila. These were the facts of her life, the things she couldn't escape.

"I'll ask Kaka Hakim for your hand. He'll give us his agreement, Laila, I know it."

He was right. Babi would. But it would make him very sad.

Tariq was still speaking, his voice quiet, then higher, asking strongly, then explaining why it was a good idea. His face was hopeful, then sad and worried.

"I can't," Laila said.

"Don't say that. I love you."

"I'm sorry—"

"I love you."

How long had she waited to hear those words from him? How many times had she dreamed of him saying them? There they were, said at last, and the situation made her feel terrible. "It's my father I can't leave," Laila said. "I'm all he has left. His heart couldn't take it either."

Tariq knew this. He knew she could not simply forget her duties in life, just as he could not forget his. But he kept asking, and she kept saying no. He made suggestions, and she said sorry. He cried, and she cried. In the end, Laila had to make him leave.

At the door, she made him promise to go without saying goodbye to others. She closed the door after him. Laila leaned her back against it, shaking against his fists hitting the door. One arm held her stomach, and a hand was over her mouth. He spoke through the door and promised that he would come back, that he would come back for her. She stood there until he got tired, until he gave up. Then she listened to his steps, which were not even, until they became quiet. Everything was quiet, except for the sound of guns in the hills and her own heart beating strongly in her stomach, her eyes, her bones.

It was the hottest day of the year. The mountains held the very hot air, making the city feel like it couldn't breathe, like smoke. There had been no electricity for days. All over Kabul, electric fans were not moving, almost like they were making fun of people. Laila was lying still on the living room sofa, her shirt wet with sweat. Every time she breathed out, it felt hot on the tip of her nose. She knew her parents were talking in Mammy's room. Two nights ago, and again last night, she had woken up and thought she heard their voices downstairs. They were talking every day now, ever since the bullet, ever since the new hole in the gate. Outside, the sound of big guns far away, then, closer, the quick, repeated sound of many gunshots, followed by another. Inside Laila, too, a fight was happening: guilt on one side, with shame, and on the other, the strong belief that what she and Tariq had done was not wrong. That it had been natural, good, beautiful, even something that had to happen, because they knew they might never see each other again. Laila turned onto her side on the sofa now and tried to remember something: At one point, when they were on the floor, Tariq had put his forehead on hers. Then he had breathed heavily and said something, either "Am I hurting you?" or "Is this hurting you?"

Laila couldn't decide which he had said. "Am I hurting you?" "Is this hurting you?"

Only two weeks since he had left, and it was already happening. Time was making those clear memories less sharp. Laila tried very hard to remember. What had he said? Suddenly, it felt very important that she knew. Laila closed her eyes. She focused.

As time passed, she would slowly get tired of trying to remember. She would find it harder and harder to bring back, to clean off, to make alive again what was long dead. There would be a day, years later, when Laila would no longer be very sad about losing him. Or not as much; not nearly. There would be a day when the details of his face would start to slip from her memory. When hearing a mother on the street call her child by Tariq's name would no longer make her feel lost. She would not miss him as much as she did now, when the pain of him not being there was always with her – like the pain in a part of the body that is no longer there after an operation. But sometimes, years later, when Laila was a grown woman, ironing a shirt or pushing her children on a swing, something small, maybe the warm feeling of a rug under her feet on a hot day or the shape of a stranger's forehead, would make her remember that afternoon together. And it would all come rushing back. How it happened without planning. How careless they were. How awkward they were. The pain of the act, the pleasure of it, the sadness of it. The warmth of their bodies together. It would fill her, take her breath away. But then it would pass. The moment would pass. Leave her feeling empty, feeling only a little restless.

She decided that he had said "Am I hurting you?" Yes. That was it. Laila was happy that she had remembered. Then Babi was in the hallway, calling her name from the top of the stairs, asking her to come up quickly.

"She's agreed!" he said, his voice shaking a little with hidden excitement. "We're leaving, Laila. All three of us. We're leaving Kabul."

In Mammy's room, the three of them sat on the bed. Outside, rockets were flying across the sky as Hekmatyar's and Massoud's fighters fought and fought. Laila knew that somewhere in the city someone had just died, and that a cloud of black smoke was hanging over a building that had fallen down with dust. There would be bodies on the ground to walk around in the morning. Some would be picked up. Others would not. Then Kabul's dogs, who had started to like human meat, would eat. Even so, Laila had a strong feeling to run through those streets. She could barely control her own happiness. It took effort to sit still, to not scream with joy. Babi said they would go to Pakistan first, to ask for permission to stay. Pakistan, where Tariq was! Tariq had only been gone seventeen days, Laila counted happily. If only Mammy had decided seventeen days earlier, they could have left together. She would be with Tariq right now! But that didn't matter now. They were going to Peshawar – she, Mammy, and Babi – and they would find Tariq and his parents there. Surely they would. They would finish their papers together. Then, who knew? Maybe Europe? America? Maybe, as Babi always said, somewhere near the sea...

Mammy was half lying, half sitting against the back of the bed. Her eyes were swollen. She was touching her hair. Three days before, Laila had gone outside to get some fresh air. She had stood by the front gate, leaning against it, when she had heard a loud crack and something had flown quickly past her right ear, sending small pieces of wood flying in front of her eyes. After Giti's death, and the thousands of shots fired and many rockets that had fallen on Kabul, it was seeing that single round hole in the gate, less than three fingers away from where Laila's head had been, that made Mammy understand the danger. It made her see that one war had already cost her two sons. This latest fighting could cost her the child she had left. On the walls of the room, photos of Ahmad and Noor looked down and smiled. Laila watched Mammy's eyes looking quickly, feeling bad, from one photo to the other. As if asking if it was okay. Asking for their agreement. As if asking for forgiveness. "There is nothing left for us here," Babi said. "Our sons are gone, but we still have Laila. We still have each other, Fariba. We can start a new life." Babi reached across the bed. When he leaned to take her hands, Mammy let him. On her face, a look of giving in. Of accepting. They held each other's hands gently, and then they were softly holding each other. Mammy put her face in his neck. She held a piece of his shirt tightly.

For hours that night, the excitement stopped Laila from sleeping. She lay in bed and watched the sky light up in bright, unpleasant orange and yellow colors. At some point, though, despite the great happiness inside and the sound of guns outside, she fell asleep. And had a dream. They are on a long, thin beach, sitting on a blanket. It's a cold, cloudy day, but it's warm next to Tariq under the blanket over their shoulders. She can see cars parked behind a low fence with broken white paint, under a line of palm trees blown by the wind. The wind makes her eyes water and covers their shoes in sand. It throws pieces of dead grass from one curved sand hill to another. They are watching sailboats moving up and down far away. Around them, seagulls are making loud noises and shaking in the wind. The wind makes more sand fly off the low hills facing the wind. Then there is a noise like a repeated sound, and she tells him something Babi had taught her years before about singing sand. He rubs her eyebrow, wiping grains of sand from it.

She sees a quick shine from the ring on his finger. It looks the same as hers – gold with a pattern like a maze all around it. It's true, she tells him. It's the rubbing, of sand against sand. Listen. He listens. He looks confused. They wait. They hear it again. A low sound, when the wind is soft. When it blows hard, a high sound, like a group singing.

Babi said they should only take what was absolutely necessary. They would sell the rest. "That should give us money in Peshawar until I find work."

For the next two days, they gathered things to sell. They put them in big piles. In her room, Laila put aside old shirts, old shoes, books, toys. Looking under her bed, she found a small yellow glass cow Hasina had given her during play time in fifth grade. A small football key chain, a gift from Giti. A little wooden zebra on wheels. A ceramic astronaut she and Tariq had found one day in a drain. She had been six and he eight. Laila remembered they had argued a little about which one of them had found it. Mammy also gathered her things. She moved slowly and didn't seem happy. Her eyes looked tired and far away. She got rid of her good plates, her cloth napkins, all her jewelry – except her wedding ring – and most of her old clothes. "You're not selling this, are you?" Laila said, lifting Mammy's wedding dress. It opened and fell onto her lap. She touched the lace and ribbon near the neck, the small pearls sewn by hand on the sleeves. Mammy shrugged and took it from her. She threw it roughly onto a pile of clothes. Like pulling off a sticky plaster quickly, Laila thought. It was Babi who had the most difficult task.

Laila found him standing in his study, looking sad as he looked at his bookshelves. He was wearing a used T-shirt with a picture of San Francisco's red bridge on it. Thick fog rose from the white water and covered the bridge's tall parts. "You know the old question," he said. "You're on a deserted island. You can have five books. Which do you choose? I never thought I'd actually have to."

"We'll have to start a new collection for you, Babi."

"Mm." He smiled sadly. "I can't believe I'm leaving Kabul. I went to school here, got my first job here, became a father in this town. It feels strange to think that I'll be sleeping under the sky of another city soon."

"It's strange for me too."

"All day, this poem about Kabul has been going around in my head. Saib-e-Tabrizi wrote it in the 1600s, I think. I used to know the whole poem, but all I can remember now is two lines:

'One could not count the moons that shimmer on her roofs,
Or the thousand splendid suns that hide behind her walls.'"

Laila looked up, saw he was crying. She put an arm around his body. "Oh, Babi. We'll come back. When this war is over. We'll come back to Kabul, if God wills. You'll see."

On the third morning, Laila started moving the piles of things to the yard and putting them by the front door. They would get a taxi and take it all to a shop that buys and sells used things. Laila kept walking between the house and the yard, back and forth, carrying piles of clothes and dishes and many boxes of Babi's books. She should have been very tired by noon, when the pile of things by the front door was as tall as her waist. But, with each trip, she knew that she was that much closer to seeing Tariq again. With each trip, her legs felt more lively, her arms less tired.

"We're going to need a big taxi."

Laila looked up. It was Mammy calling down from her bedroom upstairs. She was leaning out the window, resting her arms on the edge. The sun, bright and warm, shone on her gray hair, shone on her tired, thin face. Mammy was wearing the same bright blue dress she had worn the day of the lunch party four months earlier. It was a dress for a young woman, but for a moment, Mammy looked like an old woman to Laila. An old woman with thin arms and hollow sides of her head, and slow eyes with dark circles of tiredness around them. She looked completely different from the woman with a round face smiling happily in those old wedding photos.

"Two big taxis," Laila said.

She could see Babi too, in the living room putting boxes of books on top of each other.

"Come up when you're finished with those," Mammy said. "We'll sit down for lunch. Boiled eggs and leftover beans."

"My favorite," Laila said.

She suddenly thought of her dream. She and Tariq on a blanket. The ocean. The wind. The sand hills. What had it sounded like, she wondered now, the singing sand? Laila stopped. She saw a gray lizard crawl out of a crack in the ground. Its head moved quickly from side to side. It blinked. It ran quickly under a rock. Laila pictured the beach again. But now the singing was all around. And getting louder. Louder and louder every second, higher and higher. It filled her ears. It made everything else impossible to hear. The seagulls were like birds acting without sound now, opening and closing their mouths quietly. And the waves were hitting the shore with white bubbles and water but no loud sound. The sands kept singing. Screaming now. A sound like... a light ringing? No. A whistling.

Laila dropped the books at her feet. She looked up at the sky. She put one hand over her eyes to see better. Then a very loud sound. Behind her, a flash of white light. The ground moved suddenly under her feet. Something hot and strong hit her from behind. It knocked her shoes off. It lifted her up. And now she was flying, turning around and around in the air, seeing sky, then earth, then sky, then earth. A big burning piece of wood flew by quickly. So did a thousand pieces of glass. It seemed to Laila that she could see each piece flying all around her, turning over slowly. The sunlight shone on each piece, making tiny, beautiful colored lights. Then Laila hit the wall. She fell to the ground hard. Dirt, small stones, and glass fell on her face and arms. The last thing she knew was seeing something fall to the ground nearby with a dull sound. A bloody piece of something. On it, the tip of a red bridge sticking out from thick fog.

Shapes moving. A bright electric light shines from the ceiling above. A woman's face appears, stays above hers. Laila goes back into the dark.

Another face. This time a man's. His face seems wide and hanging down. His lips move but make no sound. All Laila hears is ringing in her ears. The man waves his hand at her. He looks unhappy. His lips move again. It hurts. It hurts to breathe. It hurts everywhere. A glass of water. A pink pill. Back to the darkness.

The woman again. Long face, eyes close together. She says something. Laila can't hear anything but the ringing. But she can see the words, like thick black syrup, coming out of the woman's mouth. Her chest hurts. Her arms and legs hurt. All around, shapes moving. Where is Tariq? Why isn't he here? Darkness. Many stars.

Babi and she, sitting high up somewhere. He is pointing to a field of barley. A machine starts working. The woman with the long face is standing over her, looking down. It hurts to breathe. Somewhere, a musical instrument called an accordion is playing. Luckily, the pink pill again. Then a deep quiet. A deep quiet covers everything.

PART THREE

Mariam

"Do you know who I am?" The girl's eyes moved slightly. "Do you know what has happened?" The girl's mouth shook a little. She closed her eyes. Swallowed. Her hand touched her left cheek. She moved her lips, saying something quietly. Mariam leaned in closer. "This ear," the girl breathed. "I can't hear."

For the first week, the girl mostly slept, helped by the pink pills Rasheed paid for at the hospital. She spoke quietly in her sleep. Sometimes she said words that didn't make sense, cried out, called out names Mariam didn't know. She cried in her sleep, became worried and restless, kicked the blankets off. Then Mariam had to hold her down. Sometimes she threw up again and again, threw up everything Mariam fed her. When she was not worried, the girl was just a pair of unhappy eyes looking from under the blanket, giving short answers to Mariam and Rasheed's questions. Some days she acted like a child, moving her head quickly from side to side when Mariam, then Rasheed, tried to feed her. She became stiff when Mariam came at her with a spoon. But she got tired quickly and finally gave in to them asking again and again. Long times of crying followed after she gave in. Rasheed told Mariam to rub healing cream on the cuts on the girl's face and neck, and on the deep cuts on her shoulder, across her arms and lower legs that were sewn closed. Mariam covered them with bandages, which she washed and used again. She held the girl's hair back, away from her face, when she had to throw up. "How long is she staying?" she asked Rasheed. "Until she's better. Look at her. She's not well enough to go. Poor thing."

It was Rasheed who found the girl, who dug her out from under the broken pieces of the building. "Lucky I was home," he said to the girl. He was sitting on a chair next to Mariam's bed, where the girl lay. "Lucky for you, I mean. I dug you out with my own hands. There was a piece of metal this big—" Here, he moved his thumb and finger apart to show her, making it look at least twice as big as it really was, Mariam thought. "This big. Sticking right out of your shoulder. It was stuck deep inside. I thought I'd have to use a tool. But you're okay. Soon, you'll be nau socha. Good as new."

It was Rasheed who saved a small number of Hakim's books. "Most of them were burned to ash. The rest were stolen, I'm afraid." He helped Mariam take care of the girl that first week. One day, he came home from work with a new blanket and pillow. Another day, a container of pills. "Vitamins," he said.

It was Rasheed who told Laila the news that her friend Tariq's house was now lived in by someone else. "A gift," he said. "From one of Sayyaf's leaders to three of his men. A gift. Ha!" The three men were actually boys with young faces made brown by the sun. Mariam would see them when she walked by, always wearing their soldier clothes. They would be sitting low by the front door of Tariq's house, playing cards and smoking. Their guns were leaning against the wall. The strong one, the one who acted like he was better than others and didn't care, was the leader. The youngest was also the quietest, the one who didn't really want to act like his friends who thought they could do anything. He had started smiling and lowering his head to say hello when Mariam walked by. When he did, some of his proud look went away, and Mariam saw a small sign of being humble that was not yet ruined. Then one morning rockets hit the house. People said later they were shot by the Hazaras of Wahdat. For some time, neighbors kept finding bits and pieces of the boys. "They deserved it," said Rasheed.

The girl was very, very lucky, Mariam thought, to escape with injuries that were not too bad, considering the rocket had turned her house into a pile of broken pieces that was smoking. And so, slowly, the girl got better. She started to eat more, started to brush her own hair. She washed herself. She started eating her meals downstairs, with Mariam and Rasheed. But then some memory would come back without being asked, and there would be long times of not speaking or times when she was in a bad mood. Times when she became quiet and sad, or felt weak. Pale and weak looks. Bad dreams and sudden times of feeling very sad. Throwing up. And sometimes feeling bad about things she had done. "I shouldn't even be here," she said one day. Mariam was putting clean covers on the bed. The girl watched from the floor, her hurt knees pulled up close to her body. "My father wanted to take out the boxes. The books. He said they were too heavy for me. But I wouldn't let him. I wanted to do it so much. I should have been the one inside the house when it happened." Mariam shook the clean sheet and let it fall onto the bed. She looked at the girl, at her blonde curly hair, her thin neck and green eyes, her face shape with noticeable bones below the eyes and full lips. Mariam remembered seeing her on the streets when she was little, walking unsurely behind her mother on the way to the bread oven. Riding on the back of her brother, the younger one, with the small amount of hair growing on his ear. Playing a game with small glass balls with the carpenter's son. The girl was looking back as if waiting for Mariam to give her some small piece of good advice, to say something that made her feel better. But what good advice did Mariam have to give? What could she say to make her feel better? As it turned out, Mariam didn't have to say anything. Because the girl's face changed shape, and she was on her hands and knees then saying she was going to be sick. "Wait! Hold on. I'll get a bowl. Not on the floor. I just cleaned... Oh. Oh. God."

Then one day, about a month after the explosion that killed the girl's parents, a man came knocking. Mariam opened the door. He said why he was there. "There is a man here to see you," Mariam said. The girl lifted her head from the pillow. "He says his name is Abdul Sharif." "I don't know any Abdul Sharif." "Well, he's here asking for you. You need to come down and talk to him."

Laila

Laila sat opposite Abdul Sharif, who was a thin man with a small head and a big, round nose with the same holes like small craters that marked his cheeks. His hair, short and brown, stood up on his head like needles. "You'll have to excuse me, sister," he said, fixing his loose shirt collar and gently wiping his forehead with a cloth. "I still haven't completely recovered, I think. Five more days of these, what are they called... sulfa pills." Laila moved in her seat so that her right ear, the one she could hear well with, was closest to him. "Were you a friend of my parents?"

"No, no," Abdul Sharif said quickly. "Excuse me." He raised a finger, took a long drink of the water that Mariam had put in front of him. "I should start from the beginning, I suppose." He gently wiped his mouth, again his forehead. "I am a businessman. I own clothing stores, mostly clothes for men. Different kinds of clothes – you name it. Two shops here in Kabul, in Taimani and Shar-e-Nau, but I recently sold those. And two in Pakistan, in Peshawar. That's where I store my goods too. So I travel a lot, back and forth. Which, now," he shook his head and laughed a little sadly, "let's just say it's quite dangerous.

"I was in Peshawar recently, for business, taking orders, checking my goods, that sort of thing. Also to visit my family. We have three daughters, thank God. I moved them and my wife to Peshawar after the Mujahideen started fighting each other. I don't want them to die because of the war. Or me, to be honest. I will go to be with them there very soon, if God allows. Anyway, I planned to be back in Kabul the Wednesday before last. But, by chance, I got sick. I won't bother you with all the details, it's enough to say that when I went to the toilet, the easier of the two, it hurt very much, like passing pieces of broken glass. I wouldn't want even a bad person like Hekmatyar to have this. My wife, dear Nadia, may God be kind to her, she really wanted me to see a doctor. But I thought I'd get better with medicine and a lot of water. Nadia insisted and I said no, we argued about it. You know the saying 'A stubborn donkey needs a stubborn driver.' This time, I'm afraid, the donkey won. That would be me."

He drank the rest of his water and held out the glass to Mariam. "If it's not too much trouble." Mariam took the glass and went to fill it. "Of course, I should have listened to her. She's always been the one who makes better decisions, may God let her live a long time. By the time I got to the hospital, I had a very high temperature and was shaking a lot like a tree in strong wind. I could hardly stand up. The doctor said I had blood poisoning. She said if I had waited two or three more days, my wife would be a woman whose husband has died. They put me in a special part of the hospital, kept for people who are very ill, I think. Oh, thank you." He took the glass from Mariam and from his coat pocket took out a big white pill. "These things are so big."

Laila watched him take his medicine. She knew her breathing had become faster. Her legs felt heavy, like something heavy was tied to them. She told herself that he wasn't finished, that he hadn't told her anything important yet. But he would continue in a moment, and she tried not to get up and leave, leave before he told her things she didn't want to hear. Abdul Sharif set his glass on the table. "That's where I met your friend, Mohammad Tariq Walizai."

Laila's heart beat faster. Tariq in a hospital? A special part? For very sick people? She swallowed dry spit. She moved on her chair. She had to prepare herself. If she didn't, she feared she would lose control. She tried hard to stop thinking about hospitals and special parts and thought instead about the time they joined a Farsi language class in winter years ago. The teacher would say their names after the bell, saying his name like that – Mohammad Tariq Walizai. It had seemed funny and too formal at the time, hearing his full name said.

"What happened to him I heard from one of the nurses," Abdul Sharif continued, lightly hitting his chest with his hand as if to help the medicine go down. "Because I spent a lot of time in Peshawar, I learned to speak Urdu quite well. Anyway, what I understood was that your friend was in a truck full of people escaping the fighting, twenty-three of them, all going to Peshawar. Near the edge of the country, they were shot at by two different groups fighting. A rocket hit the truck. Probably one that wasn't aimed at them, but you never know with these people, you never know. There were only six people who lived, all of them taken to the same special part of the hospital. Three died within twenty-four hours. Two of them lived – sisters, I understood – and had been allowed to leave the hospital. Your friend Mr. Walizai was the last one. He had been there for almost three weeks when I arrived."

So he was alive. But how badly had they hurt him? Laila wondered very worriedly. How badly? Clearly, badly enough to be in a special part of the hospital. Laila knew she had started sweating, that her face felt hot. She tried to think of something else, something nice, like the trip to Bamiyan to see the big statues with Tariq and Babi. But instead, a picture of Tariq's parents appeared: Tariq's mother stuck in the truck, upside down, shouting Tariq's name through the smoke, her arms and chest on fire, the false hair cover burning and sticking to her head... Laila had to breathe in and out quickly many times. "He was in the bed next to mine. There were no solid walls, only a curtain between us. So I could see him quite clearly."

Abdul Sharif suddenly started playing with the ring on his finger. He spoke more slowly now. "Your friend, he was badly – very badly – injured, you understand. He had plastic pipes coming out of his body everywhere. At first—" He made a small cough sound. "At first, I thought he'd lost both legs in the attack, but a nurse said no, only the right one. The left one was because he was hurt before. There were hurts inside his body too. They had operated three times already. Took out parts of his stomach area, I don't remember what else. And he was burned. Very badly. That's all I'll say about that. I'm sure you have enough bad dreams already, sister. It's not good for me to give you more sad things to think about."

Tariq had no legs now. He was a body with two short ends where his legs used to be. No legs. Laila thought she might fall down. With a strong, sad try, she tried hard to stop thinking about being in this room, out the window, away from this man, over the street outside, over the city now, and its houses with flat roofs and markets, its many small streets that looked like sand castles.

"He was given medicine to make him sleep or feel less pain most of the time. To stop him from hurting, you understand. But he had times when the medicine was stopping working, when he was thinking clearly. In pain but thinking clearly. I would talk to him from my bed. I told him who I was, where I was from. He was glad, I think, that there was a person from the same country next to him. I spoke more than he did. It was hard for him to speak. His voice was rough, and I think it hurt him to move his lips. So I told him about my daughters, and about our house in Peshawar and the outside sitting area my brother-in-law and I are building in the back. I told him I had sold the stores in Kabul and that I was going back to finish the papers. It wasn't much. But it kept him busy. At least, I like to think it did.

"Sometimes he talked too. Half the time, I couldn't understand what he was saying, but I understood enough. He said where he had lived. He talked about his uncle in Ghazni. And his mother's cooking and his father's work with wood, him playing the accordion. But, most of the time, he spoke about you, sister. He said you were – what words did he use – his earliest memory. I think that's right, yes. I could see he cared about you very much. Yes, that was easy to see. But he said he was happy you were not there."
He said he didn't want you to see him when he was hurt like that.” Laila's feet felt heavy again, stuck to the floor. It felt like all her blood had gone down there. But her mind went far away, free and fast. It flew like a fast rocket past Kabul, over rough brown hills and deserts with rough plants, past deep valleys with sharp red rocks, and over mountains with snow on top. . . “When I told him I was going back to Kabul, he asked me to find you. To tell you he was thinking about you. That he missed you. I promised him I would. I liked him quite a lot, you see. He seemed like a good boy, I could tell.” Abdul Sharif wiped his face with a cloth. “I woke up one night,” he continued. He looked at the ring again. “I think it was night, anyway. It's hard to know in those places. There are no windows. You just don't know if it's morning or evening. But I woke up, and there was some noise around the bed next to mine. You must understand that I had a lot of medicine in me. I was always going in and out of sleep. So it was hard to know what was real and what was a dream. I just remember doctors standing close around the bed. They were asking for things. Alarms were making noise. Needles were on the floor. “In the morning, the bed was empty. I asked a nurse. She said he was very brave.” Laila knew a little that she was nodding her head yes. She had known. Of course she had known. She knew the moment she sat across from this man why he was here. She knew the bad news he was bringing. “At first, you see, I didn't think you were real,” he said now. “I thought it was the medicine I was taking. Maybe I even hoped you weren't real. I never like bringing bad news. But I promised him. And, as I said, I had started to like him quite a lot. So I came by here a few days ago. I asked people about you. I talked to some neighbors. They showed me this house. They also told me about your parents. When I heard that, well, I turned around and left. I wasn't going to tell you. I thought it would be too difficult for you. For anyone.” Abdul Sharif reached across the table and put his hand on her knee. “But I came back. Because, finally, I think he would have wanted you to know. I truly believe that. I am very sorry. I wish . . .” Laila stopped listening. She was remembering the day the man from Panjshir came to tell them that Ahmad and Noor were dead. She remembered Babi, his face white, falling onto the sofa. And Mammy, putting her hand to her mouth when she heard. Laila saw Mammy fall apart that day, and it scared her. But Laila didn't feel truly sad herself. She didn't understand how terrible her mother's pain was. Now another stranger brought news of another death. Now she was the one sitting on the chair. Was this her punishment, then, for not caring about her own mother's pain? Laila remembered how Mammy had fallen to the ground. How she had screamed and pulled her hair. But Laila couldn't even do that. She could barely move. She couldn't move a single muscle. She just sat on the chair. Her hands were still in her lap. Her eyes stared at nothing. She let her mind fly away. She let it fly until it found the place. The good and safe place. Where the fields were green. Where the water was clear. Where white seeds floated in the air like dancing. Where Babi was reading under a tree. Where Tariq was sleeping with his hands on his chest. And where she could put her feet in the water and have good dreams. Below the old, sun-white rocks that looked like faces.

29. Mariam
“I am very sorry,” Rasheed said to the girl. He took his bowl of soup and meatballs from Mariam. He didn't look at Mariam. “I know you were very close... friends... you two. Always together, since you were children. This is a terrible thing that happened. Too many young Afghan men are dying like this.” He made a quick hand movement, still looking at the girl. Mariam gave him a napkin. For years, Mariam had watched him eat. The muscles near his eyes moved. One hand made small balls of rice. The back of his other hand wiped oil and rice grains from the sides of his mouth. For years, he ate without looking up, without talking. His silence felt like he was judging her. He only spoke to make a sound like he was blaming her, or a sound of not liking something. Or a one-word order for more bread or water. Now he ate with a spoon. He used a napkin. He said 'please' when he asked for water. And he talked. With a lot of energy and without stopping. “If you ask me, the Americans gave guns to the wrong man, Hekmatyar. The CIA gave him all those guns in the 1980s to fight the Russians. The Russians are gone now, but he still has the guns. And now he's using them against people who have done nothing wrong, like your parents. And he calls this a holy war. It's a joke! What does a holy war have to do with killing women and children? It would have been better if the CIA had given guns to Commander Massoud.” Mariam's eyebrows went up by themselves. Commander Massoud? In her head, she could hear Rasheed often shouting that Massoud was a traitor and a communist. But, of course, Massoud was from the Tajik group. Like Laila. “Now, he is a sensible person. An honorable Afghan man. A man who truly wants peace.” Rasheed moved his shoulders and sighed. “Not that people in America care, you know. Why would they care that different groups in Afghanistan are killing each other? How many Americans can even tell the difference between them? Don't expect help from them, I say. Now that the Russians are gone, they don't need us. We did what they wanted. For them, Afghanistan is a bad place. Excuse my language, but it's true. What do you think, dear Laila?” The girl said something quietly that was hard to understand. She moved a meatball around in her bowl. Rasheed nodded as if he was thinking deeply. It was like she had said the smartest thing he had ever heard. Mariam had to turn her eyes away. “You know, your father, may he rest in peace, your father and I used to talk about things like this. This was before you were born, of course. We would talk for a long time about politics. And about books too. We did, didn't we, Mariam? You remember.” Mariam kept busy by drinking some water. “Anyway, I hope I am not making you feel bored with all this talk about politics.” Later, Mariam was in the kitchen. She was washing dishes in water with soap. She felt a tight knot in her stomach. It wasn't so much the things he said. The clear lies. The fake kindness. Or even that he hadn't hit Mariam since he pulled the girl out from under the bricks. It was the way he said it. Like he was acting. He was trying to impress her. To charm her. It was clever but also sad. And suddenly Mariam knew that she was right about what she thought. She understood. It was a terrible feeling, like being hit hard on the side of the head. What she was seeing was him trying to get the girl to marry him. WHEN SHE FINALLY FELT BRAVE enough, Mariam went to his room. Rasheed lit a cigarette. He said, “Why not?” Mariam knew right away that she had lost. She half thought, half hoped, that he would say it wasn't true. That he would pretend to be surprised or even angry about what she was saying. She might have been in a stronger position then. She might have been able to make him feel ashamed. But his calm agreement took away her courage. His simple, direct way of speaking. “Sit down,” he said. He was lying on his bed with his back against the wall. His thick, long legs were spread out on the bed. “Sit down before you feel faint and hit your head.” Mariam felt herself fall onto the chair next to his bed. “Give me that ashtray, please?” he said. She did as he asked. Rasheed must have been sixty or older now. Mariam, and Rasheed himself, didn't know his exact age. His hair was white now, but it was still thick and rough. His eyelids and the skin on his neck hung down a bit now. His neck skin was wrinkled and felt like leather. His cheeks hung down a little more than before. In the mornings, he bent forward just a little. But he still had strong shoulders, a thick body, strong hands, and a large belly that seemed to enter the room before he did. Overall, Mariam thought he had got older much better than she had. “We need to make this situation right in the eyes of others,” he said now. He held the ashtray on his belly. He made his lips into a little smile. “People will talk. It looks bad for a young woman who is not married to live here. It is bad for my good name. And hers. And yours too, I should say.” “Eighteen years,” Mariam said. “And I never asked you for anything. Not one thing. I am asking now.” He breathed in smoke and let it out slowly. “She cannot just stay here, if that's what you mean. I cannot keep feeding her and buying her clothes and giving her a place to sleep. I am not a charity, Mariam.” “But this?” “What about it? What? You think she is too young? She is fourteen. That's not really a child. You were fifteen, remember? My mother was fourteen when she had me. Thirteen when she married.” “I... I don't want this,” Mariam said. She felt nothing because she felt dislike and could do nothing. “It is not for you to decide. It is for her and me.” “I am too old.” “She is too young, you are too old. This is silly talk.” “I am too old. Too old for you to do this to me,” Mariam said. She grabbed her dress tightly with her hands so they shook. “For you, after all these years, to make me a second wife.” “Don't be so dramatic. This is a normal thing, and you know it. I have friends who have two, three, four wives. Your own father had three. Also, what I am doing now, most men I know would have done a long time ago. You know it is true.” “I will not let it happen.” When she said this, Rasheed smiled sadly. “There is another choice,” he said. He rubbed the bottom of one foot with the rough heel of the other. “She can leave. I will not stop her. But I don't think she will go far. No food, no water, no money in her pockets. Bullets and rockets flying everywhere. How many days do you think she will last before someone takes her, hurts her, or throws her in a ditch by the road with her neck cut? Or all three?” He coughed and moved the pillow behind him. “The roads out there are very dangerous, Mariam, believe me. Dangerous people are everywhere. I do not think she would have a good chance, not at all. But let's say by some luck she gets to a city in Pakistan. What then? Do you know what those camps for people without homes are like?” He looked at her through the smoke from his cigarette. “People live under pieces of cardboard. People get sick easily. No food, crime. And that is before winter. Then people get frozen fingers and toes. They get sick lungs. People become like ice. Those camps become cold places where people die. “Of course,” he made a light, turning move with his hand, “she could stay warm in one of those places in Pakistan where women sell their bodies. Business is very good there, I hear. A beautiful girl like her could make a lot of money, don't you think?” He put the ashtray on the small table next to the bed. He moved his legs to the side of the bed. “Look,” he said. He sounded calmer now, like someone who has won. “I knew you would not like this. I don't really blame you. But this is the best thing to do. You will see. Think of it like this, Mariam. I am giving you help in the house, and giving her a safe place. A home and a husband. Now, with things being how they are, a woman needs a husband. Have you not seen all the women whose husbands are dead sleeping on the streets? They would do anything for this chance. In fact, this is... Well, I would say this is truly kind of me.” He smiled. “The way I see it, I should get a medal.” LATER, in the dark, Mariam told the girl. For a long time, the girl did not say anything. “He wants an answer by this morning,” Mariam said. “He can have it now,” the girl said. “My answer is yes.”

30. Laila
The next day, Laila stayed in bed. She was under the blanket in the morning when Rasheed put his head into the room. He said he was going to the place where men cut hair. She was still in bed when he came home late in the afternoon. He showed her his new haircut. He showed her his new suit that someone else had worn before. It was blue with thin cream lines. He showed her the wedding ring he had bought for her. Rasheed sat on the bed next to her. He acted like it was very important. He slowly untied the ribbon. He opened the box and carefully took out the ring. He said he had given Mariam's old wedding ring to the shop for this one. “She doesn't care. Trust me. She won't even see.” Laila moved away to the other side of the bed. She could hear Mariam downstairs. She could hear the sound of her iron. “She never wore it anyway,” Rasheed said. “I do not want it,” Laila said, her voice not strong. “Not like this. You must take it back.” “Take it back?” He looked annoyed for a moment, then it was gone. He smiled. “I had to give more money too. Quite a lot, actually. This is a better ring. It is made of good gold. Feel how heavy it is? Come on, feel it. No?” He closed the box. “How about flowers? That would be nice. Do you like flowers? Do you have a favorite? White flowers? Red flowers? Purple flowers? No flowers? Good! I don't think they are useful myself. I just thought... Now, I know a person who makes clothes here. I was thinking we could take you there tomorrow. You could try on a dress for the wedding.” Laila shook her head no. Rasheed lifted his eyebrows. “I would just like to—” Laila started. He put a hand on her neck. Laila moved away quickly because it hurt. His touch felt like wearing a rough, wet wool sweater without another shirt under it. “Yes?” “I would just like us to get it done.” Rasheed opened his mouth. Then he smiled a wide smile showing his yellow teeth. “You are ready,” he said. BEFORE THE MAN ABDUL SHARIF CAME, Laila had decided to go to Pakistan. Even after Abdul Sharif came with his news, Laila thought now, she might have left. Gone somewhere far away from here. To get away from this city where every street corner felt like a trap. Where every narrow street hid a ghost that jumped out at her like a toy in a box. She might have taken the chance. But, suddenly, she could not leave anymore. Not with throwing up every day. With her breasts feeling full. And knowing, somehow, in all this difficulty, that she had not had her period. Laila saw herself in a camp for people without homes. A plain field with thousands of plastic sheets tied to poles. They were moving in the cold wind that felt like needles. Under one of these tents, she saw her baby, Tariq's baby. Its head looked thin. Its mouth was open. Its skin had spots and was blue-gray. She saw its small body being washed by people she didn't know. Wrapped in a brown cloth. Put down into a hole dug in windy ground. With birds that eat dead animals looking at it. How could she run away now? Laila thought sadly about the people in her life. Ahmad and Noor, dead. Hasina, gone away. Giti, dead. Mammy, dead. Babi, dead. Now Tariq... But, like a miracle, something from her old life was still there. It was her last connection to the person she was before she was so completely alone. A part of Tariq was still alive inside her. Growing small arms. Growing hands that were almost clear. How could she put at risk the only thing she had left of him, of her old life? She decided quickly. Six weeks had gone by since she was with Tariq. If it was longer, Rasheed would start to wonder. She knew that what she was doing was not right. Not right, not honest, and shameful. And very unfair to Mariam. But even though the baby inside her was very small, Laila already saw the difficult things a mother has to do. Being good was just the first. She put a hand on her belly. She closed her eyes. LAILA WOULD REMEMBER the quiet wedding in small pieces. The cream lines on Rasheed's suit. The strong smell of the spray in his hair. The small cut from shaving just above his neck bone. His fingers were rough and yellow from tobacco. He put the ring on her finger. The pen. It did not work. Looking for a new pen. The paper they signed. His hand was steady when he signed, hers was shaking. The prayers. Seeing, in the mirror, that Rasheed had cut his eyebrow hairs. And, somewhere in the room, Mariam was watching. The air felt heavy with her not liking this. Laila could not make herself look at the older woman. LYING UNDER HIS COLD BED COVERS that night, she watched him close the curtains. She was shaking even before he started to unbutton her shirt. Before he pulled the string on her pants. He was nervous. His fingers kept fumbling with his own shirt, with opening his belt. Laila could see all of him. His chest hung down. His belly button stuck out. There was a small blue line in the middle of it. There were thick white hairs on his chest, his shoulders, and the top part of his arms. She felt his eyes moving all over her body. “Oh God, I think I love you,” he said. Her teeth were making noise because she was shaking. She asked him to turn off the lights. Later, when she was sure he was sleeping, Laila quietly put her hand under the bed for the knife she had put there before. With it, she poked the soft part of her first finger. Then she lifted the bed cover and let her finger bleed on the sheets where they had been together.

31. Mariam
During the day, Mariam mostly heard the girl. Like the sound of the bed moving upstairs. Or the sound of her feet walking quickly above. She was water splashing in the bathroom. Or a small spoon hitting a glass in the bedroom upstairs. Sometimes, Mariam saw her. A fast shape of a dress moving quickly at the edge of Mariam's sight. Running up the stairs. Her arms were crossed over her chest. Her shoes made a sound against her feet. But it was sure to happen that they would meet. Mariam saw the girl on the stairs. In the narrow passage. In the kitchen. Or by the door when the girl came in from the yard. When they met like this, a strange, uncomfortable feeling came between them. The girl held her dress and said a word or two to say sorry. As she quickly walked past, Mariam would quickly look at her from the side and see her face turn red. Sometimes Mariam could smell Rasheed on her. She could smell the sweat from his body on the girl's skin. His tobacco. The smell of him wanting something. Sex, thankfully, was finished in her life. It had been for a while. Now, even thinking about those hard times lying under Rasheed made Mariam feel sick in her stomach. But at night, they could not do this thing of avoiding each other. Rasheed said they were a family. He said it strongly. And families must eat together, he said. “What is this?” he said. His fingers were taking the meat off a bone. He stopped using a spoon and fork about a week after he married the girl. “Did I marry two statues? Go on, Mariam, say something to her. Be polite.” He was sucking the inside part of a bone. He said to the girl, “But you must not blame her. She is quiet. It is a good thing, truly. Because, I swear, if a person does not have much to say, it is better to not use many words. You and I are people from the city. But she is from the village. A village girl. Not even a village girl. No. She grew up in a small house made of mud outside the village. Her father put her there. Have you told her, Mariam, have you told her that you were born outside of marriage? Well, she was. But she does have good points, if you think about everything. You will see for yourself, dear Laila. She is strong, for one thing. A good worker. And she does not pretend to be better than she is. I will say it like this: If she was a car, she would be a Volga.” Mariam was thirty-three years old now. But that word, harami, still hurt her. Hearing it still made her feel like she was an insect that nobody wanted, like a cockroach. She remembered her mother pulling her arms. You are a clumsy little girl born outside of marriage. This is what I get after everything I have been through. A clumsy little harami who breaks valuable things. “You,” Rasheed said to the girl, “you, on the other hand, would be a Benz. A new, very good, shiny Benz car. Wow. But. But.” He lifted one finger that had oil on it. “You must be careful... in special ways... with a Benz. To show respect for how beautiful it is and how well it is made, you see. Oh, you must be thinking I am crazy with all this talk about cars. I am not saying you are cars. I am just explaining something.” For what he said next, Rasheed put the ball of rice he had made back on his plate. His hands hung loosely over his food. He looked down with a serious, thinking look. “You must not speak badly about people who are dead, especially people who died fighting for their country. And I do not mean to be rude when I say this, I want you to know. But I have some... doubts... about how your parents-- may God forgive them and let them go to heaven-- about how they, well, how they were not strict enough with you. I am sorry.” The girl gave Rasheed a cold look full of hate. Mariam saw it, but he was looking down and did not see. “It does not matter. The important thing is, I am your husband now. It is my job to protect your honor and mine. Yes, our honor. That is the husband's difficult job. You let me worry about that. Please. For you, you are the queen, and this house is your palace. Anything you need to be done, you ask Mariam, and she will do it for you. You will, won't you, Mariam? And if you want something special, I will get it for you. You see, that is the kind of husband I am. “All I ask from you, well, it is a simple thing. I ask that you do not leave this house unless I am with you. That is all. It is simple, isn't it? If I am not here and you need something very quickly, I mean you truly need it and it cannot wait for me, then you can send Mariam. And she will go out and get it for you. You have seen the difference, surely. Well, you do not use a Volga car and a Benz car in the same way. That would be silly, wouldn't it? Oh, I also ask that when we go out together, you wear a burqa. To keep you safe, of course. It is best. There are so many bad men in this town now. They have bad thoughts. They want to hurt the honor of even a woman who is married. So. That is all.” He coughed. “I should say that Mariam will watch for me when I am not here.” Here, he gave Mariam a quick look. It was a hard look, like being kicked in the head with a strong shoe. “It is not that I do not trust you. It is the opposite. Honestly, you seem much smarter than a young woman usually is. But you are still a young woman, dear Laila, a young girl. And young women can make bad choices. They can do things that cause trouble. Anyway, Mariam will be responsible. And if something goes wrong...” He kept talking and talking. Mariam sat and watched the girl from the side of her eye. Rasheed's rules and bad words fell on them like the rockets falling on Kabul. ONE DAY, Mariam was in the living room. She was folding some of Rasheed's shirts that she had taken from the washing line in the yard. She did not know how long the girl had been standing there. But when she picked up a shirt and turned around, she saw her. She was standing by the door. She was holding a glass of tea in her hands. “I did not mean to scare you,” the girl said. “I am sorry.” Mariam just looked at her. The sun shone on the girl's face. On her big green eyes and her smooth forehead. On her high cheekbones and her nice, thick eyebrows. Mariam's own eyebrows were thin and did not stand out. Her yellow hair had a part in the middle. She had not brushed it this morning. Mariam could see that the girl was nervous. The way she held the cup tightly. Her shoulders were held tight. She thought about her sitting on the bed and trying to be brave enough to come down. “The leaves are changing color,” the girl said in a friendly way. “Have you seen? Autumn is the time of year I like the most. I like the smell of it. When people burn leaves in their gardens. My mother, she liked springtime the most. You knew my mother?” “Not really.” The girl put a hand behind her ear. “Sorry?” Mariam spoke louder. “I said no. I did not know your mother.” “Oh.” “Is there something you want?” “Dear Mariam, I want to... About the things he said the other night—” “I have wanted to talk to you about it.” Mariam stopped her. “Yes, please,” the girl said seriously, almost wanting to hear it. She moved one step closer. She looked like she felt better. Outside, a bird was singing. Someone was pulling a cart. Mariam could hear the sound of its parts moving. The sound of its metal wheels hitting the ground. There was the sound of guns not far away. One shot, then three more. Then it was quiet. “I will not be your helper,” Mariam said. “I will not.” The girl moved back quickly. “No. Of course not!” “You may be the queen of the house, and I may be from the village. But I will not do what you tell me. You can complain to him, and he can cut my throat. But I will not do it. Do you hear me? I will not be your helper.” “No! I do not think—” “And if you think you can use your beauty to make me leave, you are wrong. I was here first. I will not be forced to leave. I will not let you make me leave.” “That is not what I want,” the girl said, her voice not strong. “And I see your injuries are better now. So you can start doing your part of the work in this house—” The girl was nodding her head yes quickly. Some of her tea fell out, but she did not see. “Yes, that is the other reason I came down. To thank you for helping me—” “Well, I would not have,” Mariam said quickly and angrily. “I would not have given you food and washed you and cared for you if I had known you were going to take my husband.” “Take—” “I will still cook and wash the plates. You will wash the clothes and clean the floors. The other jobs we will do one day you, one day me. And one more thing. I do not want to spend time with you. I do not want it. What I want is to be by myself. You will leave me alone, and I will do the same for you. That is how we will live together. Those are the rules.” When she finished speaking, her heart was beating very fast. Her mouth felt very dry. Mariam had never spoken like this before. She had never said what she wanted so strongly. It should have felt exciting and good. But the girl's eyes had tears in them, and her face looked sad. The good feeling Mariam got from shouting felt small and wrong somehow. She held the shirts out to the girl. “Put them in the cupboard, not the small room for clothes. He likes the white ones in the top drawer. The others in the middle, with the socks.” The girl put the cup on the floor. She put her hands out for the shirts, with her palms up. “I am sorry about all of this,” she said in a rough voice. “You should be,” Mariam said. “You should be sorry.”

32. Laila
Laila remembered a time when people were together at the house years before. It was on a day when Mammy was feeling well. The women were sitting in the garden. They were eating fresh berries from a plate. Wajma had picked them from the tree in her garden. The soft berries were white and pink. Some were the same dark purple color as the small lines on Wajma's nose. “Did you hear how his son died?” Wajma had said. She quickly put another handful of berries into her mouth that seemed to go inward. “He died in the water, didn't he?” Nila, who was Giti's mother, said. “At the lake, wasn't it?” “But did you know, did you know that Rasheed...” Wajma lifted a finger. She acted like she was nodding and chewing. She made them wait for her to eat the berries. “Did you know that he used to drink alcohol then? That he was crying because he was drunk that day? It is true. Crying drunk, that is what I heard. And that was in the middle of the morning. By noon, he was sleeping deeply on a long chair. You could have fired the loud midday gun next to his ear, and he would not have moved at all.” Laila remembered how Wajma had covered her mouth, made a sound from her stomach. How her tongue moved around the few teeth she had left. “You can guess the rest. The boy went into the water, and nobody saw him. They saw him some time later. He was floating with his face in the water. People ran to help. Half of them tried to wake up the boy. The other half tried to wake up the father. Someone bent over the boy and did the... the breathing into his mouth thing you should do. It was no use. They could all see that. The boy was dead.” Laila remembered Wajma raising a finger. Her voice was shaking as she spoke about her religion. “This is why the holy book forbids alcohol. Because the people who are not drunk always have to suffer for the bad things the drunk people do. That is how it is.” This was the story Laila was thinking about after she told Rasheed about the baby. He immediately got on his bicycle, rode to a religious building, and prayed for a son. That night, while they ate, Laila watched Mariam move a piece of meat around on her plate. Laila was there when Rasheed quickly told Mariam the news in a high, excited voice. Laila had never seen someone be so happy while being cruel. Mariam's eyes moved quickly when she heard. Her face turned red. She sat quietly, looking very sad. After, Rasheed went upstairs to listen to his radio. Laila helped Mariam clean the cloth on the floor after eating. “I cannot imagine what you are now,” Mariam said. She was picking up rice and bread pieces. “If you were a Benz before.” Laila tried to talk in a lighter, happier way. “A train? Maybe a big airplane?” Mariam stood up straight. “I hope you do not think this means you do not have to do work in the house.” Laila opened her mouth, then decided not to speak. She reminded herself that Mariam was the only one who had done nothing wrong in this situation. Mariam and the baby. Later, in bed, Laila started crying a lot. What was wrong? Rasheed wanted to know. He lifted her chin. Was she sick? Was it the baby? Was something wrong with the baby? No? Was Mariam being bad to her? “That is it, isn't it?” “No.” “I swear to God, I will go down and teach her a lesson. Who does she think she is, that girl born outside of marriage, treating you—” “No!” He was already getting up. She had to grab his arm and pull him back down. “Do not! No! She has been good to me. I just need a minute, that is all. I will be okay.” He sat next to her. He touched her neck gently. He made soft sounds. His hand slowly moved down her back, then up again. He moved closer. He showed his many teeth in a quick smile. “Let's see, then,” he said in a low, soft voice, “if I cannot help you feel better.” FIRST, the trees lost their leaves. The ones that people had not cut down for fire. The leaves were yellow and brown with spots. Then the winds came. They were cold and strong. They moved fast through the city. They pulled off the last leaves that were holding on. They left the trees looking like ghosts against the soft brown color of the hills. The first snow of the year was light. The snow fell and melted right away. Then the roads became ice. Snow gathered in piles on the roofs. It was piled up halfway on windows covered in ice. With the snow came the kites. Before, they ruled the sky in Kabul in winter. Now they were like shy visitors in a place owned by fast rockets and war planes. Rasheed kept bringing news about the war home. Laila was confused by the groups fighting each other that Rasheed tried to tell her about. Sayyaf was fighting the Hazara people, he said. The Hazara people were fighting Massoud. “And he is fighting Hekmatyar, of course. Hekmatyar has help from people in Pakistan. Those two, Massoud and Hekmatyar, hate each other very much. Sayyaf is helping Massoud. And Hekmatyar is helping the Hazara people for now.” About the Uzbek leader Dostum, who people could not guess what he would do, Rasheed said no one knew which side he would be on. Dostum had fought the Russians in the 1980s with the Afghan fighters. But he had left them and joined the government that the Russians controlled after they left. He had even been given a medal by the leader himself. Then he left that side again and went back to the Afghan fighters. For now, Rasheed said, Dostum was helping Massoud. In Kabul, especially in the west part, fires were burning strongly. Large dark clouds of smoke went up over buildings covered in snow. The buildings where foreign countries had their offices closed. Schools fell down. In the rooms where people waited at the hospital, Rasheed said, the people who were hurt were bleeding until they died. In the rooms where doctors did operations, arms and legs were being cut off without medicine to stop the pain. “But do not worry,” he said. “You are safe with me, my flower. If anyone tries to hurt you, I will pull out their liver and make them eat it.” That winter, everywhere Laila looked or went, there were walls stopping her. She thought sadly about the open sky when she was a child. About going to watch horse games with Babi. About shopping with Mammy. About running freely in the streets and talking about boys with Giti and Hasina. About sitting with Tariq in a field of green plants next to a small river somewhere. Telling each other difficult questions and trading sweets. Watching the sun go down. But thinking of Tariq was dangerous. Because before she could stop, she saw him lying on a bed. Far from home. Tubes going into his body that was burned. Like the bitter liquid that kept burning her throat these days, a deep sadness that made her unable to move would come up inside Laila. Her legs would feel weak like water. She would have to hold on to something. Laila spent that winter of 1992 cleaning the house. Cleaning the orange walls of the bedroom she shared with Rasheed. Washing clothes outside in a big metal pot. Sometimes she saw herself from above. She saw herself bending over the edge of the big pot. Her sleeves were rolled up. Her hands were pink. She was squeezing water with soap out of one of Rasheed's shirts he wore under his clothes. She felt lost then. Moving around like someone who survived a ship that sank. She could not see land. Only water for miles and miles. When it was too cold to go outside, Laila walked slowly around the house. She walked. She moved a fingernail along the wall. Down the passage, then back. Down the stairs, then up. Her face was not washed. Her hair was not brushed. She walked until she met Mariam. Mariam gave her a sad look without any happiness. Then she went back to cutting the top off a vegetable and cutting fat from the meat. A quietness that hurt would fill the room. Laila could almost see the strong, unspoken anger coming from Mariam. Like heat waves rising from the ground in the sun. She would go back to her room. Sit on the bed. And watch the snow falling. RASHEED TOOK HER to his shoe shop one day. When they were outside together, he walked next to her. One hand was holding her arm near the elbow. For Laila, being outside in the streets had become like trying hard not to get hurt. Her eyes were still getting used to seeing through the burqa. She could only see a little bit, like through a net. Her feet still tripped over the bottom edge of the burqa. She walked always afraid of tripping and falling. Of breaking her ankle by stepping into a hole in the road. Still, she felt a little better because the burqa hid who she was. Nobody would know her if she met someone she used to know. She would not have to see the surprise in their eyes. Or the sadness for her. Or the happiness they felt because her life had gone badly. Because her big hopes had been broken. Rasheed's shop was bigger and had more light than Laila had thought. He made her sit behind his work table that had many things on it. The top was full of old shoe bottoms and pieces of leather left over. He showed her his hammers. He showed her how the machine that made things smooth worked. His voice sounded high and proud. He touched her belly. Not over her shirt, but under it. His fingers were cold and rough like the skin of a tree. Her skin was stretched because she was pregnant. Laila remembered Tariq's hands. They were soft but strong. The lines on the backs of his hands were twisted and full. She had always thought they looked very manly and nice. “Getting big so quickly,” Rasheed said. “It is going to be a big boy. My son will be a hero! Like his father.” Laila pulled her shirt down. She felt very afraid when he talked like this. “How are things with Mariam?” She said they were fine. “Good. Good.” She did not tell him that they had had their first real fight. It had happened a few days before. Laila had gone to the kitchen. She found Mariam pulling out drawers quickly and closing them hard. She was looking, Mariam said, for the long wooden spoon she used to mix rice. “Where did you put it?” she said. She turned around fast to look at Laila. “Me?” Laila said. “I did not take it. I almost never come in here.” “I have seen that.” “Are you saying I did something wrong? This is how you wanted it, remember. You said you would cook the food. But if you want to change—” “So you are saying it grew small legs and walked out. Little steps, little steps. Is that what happened, then?” “I am saying...” Laila said. She was trying to stay calm. Usually, she could make herself ignore Mariam's words that made fun of her and her blaming. But her feet had become bigger. Her head hurt. And the burning feeling in her chest was very bad that day. “I am saying that maybe you put it somewhere and cannot find it.” “Put it somewhere and cannot find it?” Mariam pulled a drawer. The flat tools and sharp knives inside made noise. “How long have you been here? A few months? I have lived in this house for nineteen years, dear girl. I have kept that spoon in this drawer since you were a baby wearing cloths.” “Still,” Laila said. She was almost ready to be angry now. Her teeth were held tight. “It is possible you put it somewhere and forgot.” “And it is possible you hid it somewhere to make me angry.” “You are a sad, unhappy woman,” Laila said. Mariam moved back quickly. Then she was okay again. She pressed her lips together. “And you are a bad woman. A bad woman and a thief. A bad woman who steals, that is what you are!” Then they were shouting. They lifted cooking pots but did not throw them. They called each other bad words. Words that made Laila's face turn red now. They had not spoken since then. Laila was still surprised at how easily she had lost control. But the truth was, a part of her had liked it. She had liked how it felt to shout at Mariam. To say bad words to her. To have someone to point all her growing anger and sadness at. Laila thought, with a kind of understanding, if it was not the same for Mariam. After, she had run upstairs and fallen onto Rasheed's bed. Downstairs, Mariam was still shouting, “Bad luck on you! Bad luck on you!” Laila had lain on the bed. She was making sad sounds into the pillow. She missed her parents suddenly and with a very strong feeling. A feeling she had not felt since those terrible days right after the attack. She lay there. She was holding the bed cover tightly with her hands. Then, suddenly, she could not breathe for a moment. She sat up quickly. Her hands went down to her belly. The baby had just moved inside her for the first time.

33. Mariam
Early one morning the next spring, in 1993, Mariam stood by the window in the living room. She watched Rasheed help the girl go out of the house. The girl was walking unevenly. She was bent forward. One arm was held over her belly, which was stretched tight like a drum. You could see the shape of it through her burqa. Rasheed was worried and too careful. He was holding her arm. He was showing her where to go across the yard. Like a person directing cars. He made a sign with his hand for her to wait here. He quickly went to the front gate. Then he made a sign for the girl to come forward. He held the gate open with one foot. When she got to him, he took her hand. He helped her go through the gate. Mariam could almost hear him say, “Be careful where you step now, my flower.” They came back early the next evening. Mariam saw Rasheed come into the yard first. He let go of the gate too soon, and it almost hit the girl's face. He walked across the yard in a few quick steps. Mariam saw a shadow on his face. A dark look under the reddish light of the evening. In the house, he took off his coat. He threw it on the sofa. He walked past Mariam quickly. He said in a rough voice, “I am hungry. Get the evening meal ready.” The front door of the house opened. From the passage, Mariam saw the girl. She was holding a baby wrapped in cloth in her left arm. She had one foot outside and one foot inside. She held the door with her foot so it would not close fast. She was bent over. She was making sounds because she was trying hard. She was trying to reach for the paper bag of her things. She had put it down to open the door. Her face showed pain from trying hard. She looked up and saw Mariam. Mariam turned around. She went to the kitchen to heat Rasheed's food. “It feels like someone is pushing a tool into my ear,” Rasheed said. He was rubbing his eyes. He was standing in Mariam's door. His eyes looked swollen. He was only wearing loose trousers tied with a loose knot. His white hair was messy. It was pointing in all directions. “This crying. I cannot stand it.” Downstairs, the girl was walking across the floor with the baby. She was trying to sing to her. “I have not slept well for two months,” Rasheed said. “And the room smells very bad. There are dirty cloths everywhere. I stepped on one just the other night.” Mariam smiled a little inside. It felt wrong but good. “Take her outside!” Rasheed shouted without looking. “Can't you take her outside?” The singing stopped for a short time. “She will get sick lungs!” “It is summer!” “What?” Rasheed closed his teeth tightly. He spoke louder. “I said, it is warm outside!” “I am not taking her outside!” The singing started again. “Sometimes, I promise, sometimes I want to put that thing in a box. And let it float down the river in Kabul. Like baby Moses.” Mariam never heard him call his daughter by the name the girl had given her. Aziza, which means the one who is loved. It was always 'the baby'. Or, when he was very angry, 'that thing'. Some nights, Mariam heard them arguing quietly. She walked quietly to their door. She listened to him complain about the baby. Always the baby. The crying that did not stop. The smells. The toys that made him fall. How the baby had taken Laila's attention away from him. With always needing to be fed, have air taken out, changed, walked, held. The girl, in return, spoke angrily to him for smoking in the room. For not letting the baby sleep with them. There were other arguments. They spoke in low voices. “The doctor said six weeks.” “Not yet, Rasheed. No. Stop touching me. Please. Do not do that.” “It has been two months.” “Quiet. There. You woke up the baby.” Then, in a sharper voice, “Are you happy now?”Mariam went back to her room. Rasheed asked, “Can’t you help?”
“What do I know about babies?” Mariam said.
Laila called, “Rasheed! Can you get the bottle? It’s on the cupboard. She won’t drink from me. I want to try the bottle again.” The baby cried loudly.
Rasheed closed his eyes. “That thing is like a fighter. I tell you, Laila has given birth to a warlord.”
Mariam saw that Laila spent her days feeding, rocking, and walking the baby. Even when the baby slept, Laila washed dirty diapers. She also cut the baby’s nails, washed clothes, and hung them to dry. These clothes caused a disagreement. “What’s wrong with them?” Rasheed said.
“They are boy’s clothes.”
“Do you think she knows? I paid good money for them. And don’t talk to me in that way. This is a warning.”
Every week, Laila burned seeds to make smoke and waved it at the baby to keep bad things away. Mariam was tired watching Laila’s energy, but she had to admit she admired her a little. She saw how Laila’s eyes showed love for the baby, even when she was tired. Laila laughed when the baby made wind. She was happy about the smallest changes and said everything the baby did was wonderful. “Look! She’s reaching for the toy. How clever she is.”
“I’ll call the newspapers,” Rasheed said.
Every night, Laila wanted to show Rasheed things the baby did. When Laila asked him to watch, Rasheed looked up with a look that showed he was not interested. “Watch. Watch how she laughs when I click my fingers. There. See? Did you see?”
Rasheed just made a noise and went back to eating. Mariam remembered how Rasheed used to be very interested in Laila. Everything she said made him happy and listen. It was strange, because Mariam should have been happy that Rasheed liked Laila less. But she wasn’t. She felt sorry for Laila.
At dinner, Laila also talked a lot about her worries. She worried most about the baby getting sick. She thought every cough was pneumonia. Every loose stomach was dysentery. Every red mark was chicken pox or measles.
“You should not care so much,” Rasheed said one night.
“What do you mean?”
“I listened to the radio. They said that in Afghanistan, one out of four children dies before they are five years old. That’s what they said. Now, they - What? What? Where are you going? Come back here!” He looked at Mariam, confused. “What’s wrong with her?”
That night, Mariam was in bed. It was a hot summer night. She heard Rasheed and Laila arguing again. Usually, it stopped quickly, but this time it went on for a long time and got worse. Mariam could hear Rasheed shouting. Laila’s voice was quiet and sharp under his. Soon the baby was crying loudly. Then Mariam heard their door open very hard. Later, she would see the mark of the doorknob on the wall.
She was sitting up in bed when her own door opened quickly and Rasheed came in. He wore white underwear and flip-flops. He had a belt in his hand and was wrapping the end around his fist.
“It’s your fault. I know it is,” he said angrily, walking towards her.
Mariam got out of bed and moved away. She put her arms over her chest, where he often hit her first. “What are you talking about?” she asked, her voice shaking.
“Her saying no to me. You are teaching her.”
For many years, Mariam had learned to be strong against his angry words and insults. But this fear she could not control. After all these years, she still shook with fear when he was like this, smiling in a mean way, holding the belt tightly, the sound of the leather, the look in his red eyes. It was the fear of a goat when a tiger sees it.
Now Laila was in the room. Her eyes were wide, her face was twisted with worry.
“I should have known you would make her bad,” Rasheed said to Mariam. He swung the belt, hitting his own leg. The metal part made a loud noise.
“Stop it, enough!” Laila said. “Rasheed, you cannot do this.”
“Go back to the room.”
Mariam moved back again.
“No! Don’t do this!”
“Now!”
Rasheed lifted the belt again and came towards Mariam.
Then something surprising happened: Laila quickly moved forward and grabbed his arm. She used both hands and tried to pull him down, but she was too small. But she did slow him down as he moved towards Mariam.
“Let go!” Rasheed shouted.
“You win. You win. Don’t do this. Please, Rasheed, no hitting! Please don’t do this.”
They struggled like this, Laila holding on and asking him to stop, Rasheed trying to push her away, watching Mariam, who was too shocked to do anything. In the end, Mariam knew he would not hit her that night. He had shown them his power. He stood there for a few moments longer, his arm raised, breathing fast, sweat on his forehead. Slowly, Rasheed lowered his arm. Laila’s feet touched the ground, and she still held on, as if she didn’t trust him. He had to pull his arm free.
“I know what you are doing,” he said, putting the belt over his shoulder. “I know what both of you are doing. I won’t be a fool in my own house.” He gave Mariam one last angry look and pushed Laila in the back as he left.
When she heard their door close, Mariam got back into bed. She put her head under the pillow and waited for the shaking to stop.
Mariam woke up three times that night. The first time, it was the sound of rockets far away. The second time, it was the baby crying downstairs and Laila trying to quiet her. Finally, she woke up because she was thirsty.
Downstairs, the living room was dark, but some moonlight came through the window. Mariam could hear a fly. She saw the shape of the stove. On her way to the kitchen, Mariam almost fell over something. There was a shape on the floor. When her eyes saw better, she saw Laila and her baby sleeping on a blanket. Laila was sleeping on her side, making soft snoring sounds. The baby was awake.
Mariam lit the lamp on the table and sat down low. In the light, she saw the baby up close for the first time. She saw the dark hair, the big eyes, the pink cheeks, and lips the color of a red fruit. Mariam felt like the baby was looking at her too. The baby was on her back, looking at Mariam carefully. Mariam thought her face might scare the baby, but then the baby made a happy sound. Mariam knew the baby liked her.
“Quiet,” Mariam whispered. “You will wake your mother.” The baby made her hand into a fist. She moved it up and down and put it in her mouth. While her hand was in her mouth, the baby smiled at Mariam. Little wet bubbles shone on her lips.
“Look at you. You look unhappy, dressed like a boy. And wearing so many clothes in this heat. No wonder you are still awake.” Mariam took the blanket off the baby. She was surprised to find another one under it. She made a sound with her tongue and took that one off too. The baby laughed happily because she felt cooler. She moved her arms like a bird.
“Better, right?” As Mariam moved back, the baby grabbed her little finger. The small fingers held on tightly. They felt warm and soft and wet from her mouth.
“Gunuh,” the baby said.
“All right, enough, let go.” The baby held on and kicked her legs again.
Mariam pulled her finger free. The baby smiled and made happy sounds. Her hand went back to her mouth.
“What are you so happy about? What are you smiling at? You are not as clever as your mother says. Your father is a cruel man and your mother is a fool. You wouldn’t smile so much if you knew. Go to sleep now.” Mariam stood up and walked a few steps. Then the baby started making sounds that Mariam knew meant she was going to cry loudly. Mariam went back. “What is it? What do you want from me?”
The baby smiled without teeth.
Mariam sighed. She sat down and let the baby grab her finger. She watched as the baby made sounds and moved her legs. Mariam sat there and watched until the baby stopped moving and started sleeping softly. Outside, birds were singing happily. Sometimes, when the birds flew, Mariam could see their wings in the blue moonlight. Even though she was very thirsty and her feet felt strange, Mariam stayed for a long time before gently taking her finger from the baby’s hand and getting up.
Laila’s favorite thing was lying next to Aziza. She loved having her baby’s face so close that she could watch her eyes get bigger and smaller. Laila loved touching Aziza’s soft skin, her small fingers, the fat parts on her arms. Sometimes she put Aziza on her chest and whispered things about Tariq, the father Aziza would never know. Laila told her that he was good at solving problems, that he was playful and laughed easily. “He had the nicest eyelashes, thick like yours. A good chin, a nice nose, and a round forehead. Oh, your father was handsome, Aziza. He was perfect. Perfect, like you are.” But she was careful not to say his name.
Sometimes she saw Rasheed looking at Aziza in a strange way. The other night, he was sitting on the floor cutting hard skin from his foot. He said, “So what was it like between you two?” Laila looked confused, as if she didn’t understand.
“You and the man with one leg. What was it you had, you and him?”
“He was my friend,” she said. She tried to keep her voice the same. She started making a bottle.
“You know that.”
“I don’t know what I know.” Rasheed put the pieces of skin on the window. He lay on the bed. The bed made a loud noise. He spread his legs and touched himself there. “And as... friends, did you two ever do anything wrong?”
“Wrong?”
Rasheed smiled in a light way, but Laila felt his eyes watching her, cold. “Let me think now. Did he ever kiss you? Maybe put his hand where he shouldn’t?” Laila looked angry. She hoped it looked real. She felt her heart beating fast in her throat.
“He was like a brother to me.”
“So he was a friend or a brother?”
“Both. He—”
“Which one was it?”
“He was like both.”
“But brothers and sisters are curious about each other. Yes. Sometimes a brother lets his sister see his private part, and a sister will—”
“You make me feel sick,” Laila said.
“So there was nothing.”
“I don’t want to talk about this anymore.”
Rasheed tilted his head, closed his lips, and nodded. “People talked, you know. I remember. They said all sorts of things about you two. But you are saying there was nothing.” She tried to stare angrily at him.
He looked into her eyes for a very long time without blinking. This made her hands tight around the milk bottle. It was hard for Laila not to show her fear. She was afraid of what he would do if he found out she was stealing from him. Every week, since Aziza was born, she opened his wallet when he was asleep or outside and took one banknote. Some weeks, if there was not much money, she took only a little, or nothing, because she was afraid he would notice. When there was more money, she took a bit more, once even taking a larger amount. She hid the money in a small bag she sewed inside her winter coat. She wondered what he would do if he knew she was planning to run away next spring. Or next summer at the latest. Laila hoped to save a lot of money, half of which would be for the bus ticket from Kabul to Pakistan. She would sell her wedding ring when it was time, and the other jewelry Rasheed gave her when she was like the queen of his house.
“Anyway,” he said finally, tapping his stomach with his fingers, “I cannot be blamed. I am a husband. These are things a husband wonders about. But he is lucky he died the way he did. Because if he was here now, if I could get my hands on him...” He made a sound with his teeth and shook his head.
“What happened to not speaking badly of dead people?”
“I guess some people cannot be dead enough,” he said.
Two days later, Laila woke up and found a pile of baby clothes outside her door. There was a dress with pink fish, a blue dress with socks and gloves, yellow pajamas, and green trousers.
That night at dinner, Rasheed was eating and talking. He didn’t notice Aziza or the new pajamas Laila had put on her. He said there was a rumor that one group of fighters would join another. If that happened, he said, the war would be much worse than before. He ate some food Mariam had made. “Let’s hope it’s just a rumor,” he said. “Because if that happens, this war will seem like a walk in the park.”
Later, he had sex with her quickly without talking. He was still wearing most of his clothes. When it was over, he rolled off her and fell asleep fast.
Laila quietly left the bedroom and found Mariam in the kitchen. She was sitting low down, cleaning fish. Rice was already soaking. The kitchen smelled of spices, smoke, cooked onions, and fish. Laila sat in a corner.
“Thank you,” she said.
Mariam didn’t look at her. She finished cutting the first fish and picked up the second. She used a knife to cut off the fins. Then she turned the fish over and cut it carefully from the bottom to the top. Laila watched her put her thumb inside the fish’s mouth and pull out the parts inside.
“The clothes are lovely.”
“I didn’t need them,” Mariam said quietly. She put the fish on a newspaper that had wet gray marks on it and cut off its head. “It was for your daughter or for the moths.”
“Where did you learn to clean fish like that?”
“When I was a little girl, I lived near a river. I used to catch my own fish.”
“I’ve never fished.”
“It’s not difficult. It’s mostly waiting.”
Laila watched her cut the fish into three pieces. “Did you sew the clothes yourself?”
Mariam nodded.
“When?”
Mariam washed the pieces of fish in a bowl of water. “When I was pregnant the first time. Or maybe the second time. Eighteen, nineteen years ago. A long time ago. As I said, I never used them.”
“You’re a really good sewer. Maybe you can teach me.” Mariam put the washed fish into a clean bowl. Water dripped from her fingers. She looked up at Laila, as if she was seeing her for the first time. “The other night, when he... No one has ever helped me like that before,” she said.
Laila looked at Mariam’s tired face, her eyes, the deep lines around her mouth. She saw these things as if for the first time. And for the first time, she did not see an enemy. She saw a face that showed many problems she had not talked about, many difficult things she had accepted and lived through. If she stayed, Laila wondered, would her own face look like that in twenty years?
“I couldn’t let him,” Laila said. “I wasn’t raised in a home where people did things like that.”
“This is your home now. You should get used to it.”
“Not to that. I won’t.”
“He will hurt you too, you know,” Mariam said, drying her hands with a cloth. “Soon enough. And you gave him a daughter. So, you see, your mistake is even worse than mine.”
Laila stood up. “I know it’s cold outside, but what do you say we have a cup of tea in the yard?”
Mariam looked surprised. “I can’t. I still have to cut and wash the beans.”
“I will help you do it in the morning.”
“And I have to clean up here.”
“We will do it together. If I’m right, there are some sweets left. They are very good with tea.” Mariam put the cloth on the table. Laila felt her nervousness as she pulled at her sleeves and adjusted her headscarf.
“The Chinese say it is better to have no food for three days than no tea for one.”
Mariam smiled a little. “It is a good saying.”
“It is.”
“But I can’t stay long.”
“One cup.”
They sat outside on chairs and ate sweets with their fingers from a bowl. They had a second cup, and when Laila asked if she wanted a third, Mariam said yes. As they heard gunshots far away, they watched the clouds move over the moon and the last fireflies making yellow lights in the dark. And when Aziza woke up crying and Rasheed shouted for Laila to come upstairs and make her quiet, Laila and Mariam looked at each other. It was a look without hiding anything, a look of understanding. And in this short look with Mariam, Laila knew that they were not enemies anymore.
From that night on, Mariam and Laila did their work together. They sat in the kitchen and made bread, cut onions and garlic. They gave small pieces of cucumber to Aziza, who played with spoons nearby. In the yard, Aziza lay in a baby bed, wearing many clothes. Mariam and Laila watched her as they washed clothes. Mariam’s hands touched Laila’s hands as they washed shirts and diapers.
Mariam slowly got used to this new, nice friendship. She looked forward to the three cups of tea she and Laila would have in the yard every night. In the mornings, Mariam waited to hear Laila’s shoes on the stairs and the sound of Aziza laughing. She looked forward to seeing Aziza’s small teeth and smelling her skin. If Laila and Aziza slept late, Mariam felt worried. She washed dishes that were already clean. She moved the pillows in the living room. She cleaned windowsills that were not dirty. She kept herself busy until Laila came into the kitchen with Aziza on her hip.
When Aziza first saw Mariam in the morning, her eyes opened wide, and she started making sounds and moving in her mother’s arms. She held out her arms towards Mariam, wanting to be held. Her small hands opened and closed quickly. On her face was a look of love and worry.
“What a fuss you are making,” Laila would say, letting her go so she could crawl towards Mariam. “Calm down. Your Aunt Mariam is not going anywhere. There she is, your aunt. See? Go on now.”
As soon as she was in Mariam’s arms, Aziza put her thumb in her mouth and hid her face in Mariam’s neck.
Mariam held her carefully, with a smile that showed she was a little confused but also happy. Mariam had never been wanted like this before. Love had never been shown to her so clearly, so completely. Aziza made Mariam want to cry.
“Why have you given your little heart to an old, ugly person like me?” Mariam would say softly into Aziza’s hair. “Huh? I am nobody, don’t you see? A village person. What can I give you?” But Aziza just made happy sounds and hid her face deeper. And when she did that, Mariam felt a strong, happy feeling. Her eyes became wet. Her heart felt light. And she was surprised how, after all these years of feeling lost, she had found the first real connection in her life with this little child.
Early the next year, in January 1994, one group of fighters joined another. They began to fight against other groups in Kabul. From different sides of the city, they shot rockets at each other. The streets were covered with dead bodies, broken glass, and pieces of metal. People stole things, killed others, and raped women. This was used to scare people and reward the fighters. Mariam heard that women were killing themselves because they were afraid of being raped. She heard that men would kill their wives or daughters if they were raped, to protect their family’s honor.
Aziza screamed when she heard the loud sound of the rockets. To make her feel better, Mariam put grains of rice on the floor to make shapes, and let Aziza play with them. She drew elephants for Aziza quickly, the way her own father Jalil had taught her.
Rasheed said that many people were being killed every day. Hospitals and places with medicine were being hit. Trucks bringing food were stopped from entering the city, attacked, and shot at. Mariam wondered if the fighting was like this in her old home in Herat. She wondered if her old teacher Mullah Faizullah was still alive, and his family. And her father, Jalil. Was he hiding, like her? Or had he taken his wives and children and left the country? She hoped Jalil was somewhere safe and had escaped all the killing.
For a week, the fighting made even Rasheed stay home. He locked the door to the yard and put traps. He locked the front door too and put the sofa in front of it. He walked around the house, smoking, looking outside, cleaning his gun, loading it again and again. Twice, he shot his gun into the street, saying he saw someone trying to climb the wall.
“They are forcing young boys to join,” he said. “The fighters are. In the daytime, with guns. They take boys right from the streets. And when soldiers from another group catch these boys, they hurt them badly. I heard they give them electric shocks - that’s what I heard - that they crush their private parts with tools. They make the boys show them where their homes are. Then they break in, kill their fathers, rape their sisters and mothers.” He waved his gun above his head. “Let’s see them try to break into my house. I will crush their private parts! I will shoot their heads off! Do you know how lucky you two are to have a man who is not afraid of the devil himself?” He looked down at Aziza, who was near his feet. “Get away from me!” he said sharply, waving his gun to make her go away. “Stop following me! And stop moving your hands like that. I am not picking you up. Go on! Go on before you get stepped on.”
Aziza looked scared. She crawled back to Mariam, looking hurt and confused. In Mariam’s lap, she put her thumb in her mouth sadly and watched Rasheed with a quiet, thoughtful look. Sometimes, she looked up, and Mariam thought she wanted to be told things were okay. But when it came to fathers, Mariam had no comfort to give.
Mariam felt relieved when the fighting stopped again. Mostly because they didn’t have to stay inside with Rasheed and his bad mood. He had also scared her badly by waving the loaded gun near Aziza.
One day that winter, Laila asked if she could braid Mariam’s hair. Mariam sat still and watched Laila’s thin fingers in the mirror. Laila was concentrating hard. Aziza was sleeping on the floor. She held a doll that Mariam had made for her. Mariam had filled it with beans and made it a dress and a necklace. Then Aziza made a sound in her sleep. Laila started to laugh, and Mariam laughed with her. They laughed like this, looking at each other in the mirror, their eyes wet with tears. It felt so easy and real that Mariam suddenly began to tell her about Jalil, and her mother Nana, and the bad spirit.
Laila stood with her hands on Mariam’s shoulders, looking at Mariam’s face in the mirror. The words came out, like blood from a cut. Mariam told her about her family, the difficult trip to Jalil’s house, her mother’s suicide. She told her about Jalil’s wives, and marrying Rasheed quickly, the trip to Kabul, her pregnancies, the times she hoped and was disappointed, Rasheed becoming angry and cruel to her.
Afterwards, Laila sat near Mariam’s chair. She gently took a piece of dirt from Aziza’s hair. There was a silence.
“I have something to tell you too,” Laila said.
Mariam did not sleep that night. She sat in bed and watched the snow falling quietly.
Years had passed. Leaders in Kabul had been put in power and killed. A big country had been defeated. Old wars had finished and new ones had started. But Mariam had hardly noticed. She had spent these years in a faraway part of her mind. Like a dry field, without wishes or sadness, without dreams or disappointment. There, the future didn’t matter. And the past only taught her this: that love was a dangerous mistake, and hope, which came with it, was a trick. And whenever those two bad feelings started to grow in that dry field, Mariam pulled them out. She pulled them out and threw them away before they could become strong.
But somehow, in the last months, Laila and Aziza - who was like her, born outside marriage - had become part of her. And now, without them, the life Mariam had accepted for so long suddenly felt impossible to bear.
Laila had said, “We are leaving this spring, Aziza and I. Come with us, Mariam.”
The years had not been kind to Mariam. But maybe, she thought, kinder years were still waiting. A new life, a life where she would find the good things that Nana had said a child like her would never see. Two new flowers had unexpectedly grown in her life. And as Mariam watched the snow coming down, she imagined her old teacher moving his prayer beads, leaning close and whispering to her in his soft voice, “But it is God Who has planted them, Mariam dear. And it is His wish that you take care of them. It is His wish, my girl.”
As the sky became light that spring morning in 1994, Laila felt sure that Rasheed knew. That any moment, he would pull her out of bed and ask if she really thought he was so stupid that he wouldn’t find out. But the call to prayer sounded, the morning sun shone, the birds sang, and nothing unusual happened. She heard him in the bathroom, then downstairs, making tea. She heard his keys. Now he was walking his bicycle across the yard. Laila looked through a small opening in the living room curtains. She watched him ride away, a large man on a small bicycle, the sun shining brightly off the handles.
“Laila?”
Mariam was in the doorway. Laila could see that she hadn’t slept either. She wondered if Mariam had also felt happy and scared many times during the night.
“We will leave in half an hour,” Laila said.
In the back of the taxi, they did not speak. Aziza sat on Mariam’s lap, holding her doll, looking at the city going by with wide, confused eyes. “Look!” she cried, pointing to girls playing. “Mariam! Look.” Everywhere she looked, Laila thought she saw Rasheed. She saw him coming out of shops. She felt watched. She didn’t look at anyone’s face, but she felt like everyone knew what she and Mariam were doing and did not agree with it.
“Do you see anyone?” Laila asked.
Mariam moved Aziza in her arms. “I am looking.”
Laila knew this would be the first difficult part: finding a man who would pretend to be their family. The freedom women had had between 1978 and 1992 was gone. Laila remembered her father saying it was a good time to be a woman then. Since the fighters took control, Afghanistan had become an Islamic State. The court now had strict religious leaders who removed the old laws that helped women. Instead, they made laws based on strict Islamic rules. These laws told women to cover themselves, did not allow them to travel without a male relative, and punished cheating with death by stones. Even if these laws were not always followed strictly. But they would follow them more, Laila had told Mariam, if they weren’t so busy killing each other. And us.
The second difficult part would be arriving in Pakistan. Pakistan already had many Afghan people who had left their homes. It had closed its borders to Afghans. Laila had heard that only people with special papers could enter. But the border was easy to cross, and Laila knew that thousands of Afghans were still entering Pakistan by giving money to people, or by showing they needed help because of the war. There were also people who could help them cross illegally. We will find a way when we get there, she had told Mariam.
“How about him?” Mariam said, pointing with her chin.
“He does not look like someone we can trust.”
“And him?”
“Too old. And he is traveling with two other men.”
Finally, Laila found a man sitting outside on a bench with a woman wearing a veil and a little boy about Aziza’s age. He was tall and thin, with a beard. He wore a shirt and a simple gray coat with missing buttons. “Wait here,” she said to Mariam. As she walked away, she heard Mariam praying again.
When Laila came to the young man, he looked up and put his hand over his eyes because of the sun.
“Excuse me, brother, are you going to Peshawar?”
“Yes,” he said.
“I wonder if you can help us. Can you do us a favor?” He gave the boy to his wife. He and Laila walked away.
“What is it, sister?” She was happy to see that he had kind eyes and a nice face.
She told him the story she and Mariam had planned. She said she was a widow. She and her mother and daughter had no one left in Kabul. They were going to Peshawar to stay with her uncle.
“You want to come with my family,” the young man said.
“I know it is trouble for you. But you look like a good brother, and I—”
“Don’t worry, sister. I understand. It is no trouble. Let me go and buy your tickets.”
“Thank you, brother. This is a good deed. God will remember.” She took the envelope from her pocket under her burqa and gave it to him. In it was all the money she had saved, plus the money from selling the ring. He put the envelope in his trousers pocket. “Wait here.”
She watched him go into the station. He came back half an hour later.
“It is best I keep your tickets,” he said. “The bus leaves in one hour, at eleven. We will all get on together. My name is Wakil. If they ask - and they should not - I will tell them you are my cousin.” Laila told him their names, and he said he would remember.
“Stay close,” he said.
They sat on the bench next to Wakil and his family. It was a sunny, warm morning. There were only a few thin clouds far away over the hills. Mariam started feeding Aziza some crackers she had remembered to bring. She offered one to Laila.
“I will be sick,” Laila laughed. “I am too excited.”
“Me too.”
“Thank you, Mariam.”
“For what?”
“For this. For coming with us,” Laila said. “I don’t think I could do this alone.”
“You won’t have to.”
“We are going to be okay, aren’t we, Mariam, where we are going?”
Mariam’s hand moved across the bench and held hers. “The holy book says God is the East and the West, so wherever you go, you are near God.”
“Bus!” Aziza cried, pointing to a bus. “Mariam, bus!”
“I see it, Aziza dear,” Mariam said. “That’s right, bus. Soon we are all going to ride on a bus. Oh, the things you are going to see.”
Laila smiled. She watched a man cutting wood in his shop across the street. She watched the cars driving past, their windows covered in dirt. She watched the buses waiting by the road, with pictures painted on their sides. In the warm morning sun, Laila felt happy and brave. She felt that good feeling again. And when a thin dog with yellow eyes walked by, Laila bent forward and touched its back gently.
A few minutes before eleven, a man with a loudspeaker called for everyone going to Peshawar to get on the bus. The bus doors opened with a loud sound. Many people hurried towards it, trying to get on quickly. Wakil looked at Laila as he picked up his son.
“We are going,” Laila said.
Wakil went first. As they got near the bus, Laila saw faces in the windows. People were saying goodbye. A young soldier was checking tickets at the bus door.
“Bus!” Aziza cried. Wakil gave the tickets to the soldier, who tore them in half and gave them back. Wakil let his wife get on first. Laila saw Wakil and the soldier look at each other. Wakil leaned down and said something quietly to the soldier. The soldier nodded. Laila’s heart felt heavy.
“You two, with the child, step to the side,” the soldier said.
Laila pretended not to hear. She tried to climb the steps, but he grabbed her shoulder and pulled her roughly out of the line. “You too,” he called to Mariam. “Hurry up! You are stopping the line.”
“What is the problem, brother?” Laila said, her lips feeling strange. “We have tickets. Didn’t my cousin give them to you?”
He put his finger to his lips to tell her to be quiet and spoke quietly to another guard. The second guard, a fat man with a mark on his cheek, nodded. “Follow me,” this one said to Laila.
“We have to get on this bus,” Laila cried. She knew her voice was shaking. “We have tickets. Why are you doing this?”
“You are not going to get on this bus. You should just accept that. You will follow me. Unless you want your little girl to see us pull you.” As they were led to a truck, Laila looked back. She saw Wakil’s boy at the back of the bus. The boy saw her too and waved happily.
At the police station, they were made to sit separately. They sat at opposite ends of a long hallway that had many people in it. Between them was a desk where a man smoked and sometimes typed. Three hours passed like this. Aziza walked from Laila to Mariam and back. She played with something the man at the desk gave her. She finished the crackers. After some time, she fell asleep on Mariam’s lap.
Around three o’clock, Laila was taken to a room to be asked questions. Mariam had to wait with Aziza in the hallway.
The man sitting at the desk in the room was about thirty years old. He wore normal clothes, a black suit and tie. He had a beard and his eyebrows met in the middle. He looked at Laila, tapping a pencil on the desk.
“We know,” he started, clearing his throat and covering his mouth with his hand, “that you have already told one lie today, sister. The young man at the station was not your cousin. He told us himself. The question is if you will tell more lies today. I advise you not to.”
“We were going to stay with my uncle,” Laila said. “That is the truth.”
The policeman nodded. “The sister in the hallway, she is your mother?”
“Yes.”
“She speaks with a Herat accent. You do not.”
“She was raised in Herat, I was born here in Kabul.”
“Of course. And you are a widow? You said you were. I am sorry to hear that. And this uncle, where does he live?”
“In Peshawar.”
“Yes, you said that.” He wet the end of his pencil with his tongue and held it above a piece of paper. “But where in Peshawar? Which area, please? Street name, building number.” Laila tried to stop the feeling of panic coming up in her chest. She gave him the name of the only street she knew in Peshawar. She had heard it once at a party. “Jamrud Road.”
“Oh, yes. Same street as the big hotel. He might have told you about it.”
Laila took this chance and said he had. “That very same street, yes.”
“Except the hotel is on Khyber Road.”
Laila could hear Aziza crying in the hallway. “My daughter is scared. Can I get her, brother?”
“I prefer ‘Officer.’ And you will be with her soon. Do you have a telephone number for this uncle?”
“I do. I did. I...Even with her burqa, Laila felt his eyes looking at her. "I'm so upset, I think I forgot it." He breathed out loudly through his nose. He asked for the uncle's name, his wife's name. How many children? Their names? Where did he work? How old was he? His questions made Laila nervous. He put down his pen, put his fingers together, and leaned forward like a parent talking to a small child. "You know, hamshira, it is against the law for a woman to run away. We see this a lot. Women travel alone, saying their husbands are dead. Sometimes it's true, but often it's not. You can go to prison for running away, you understand, yes?" "Please let us go, Officer..." She read his name tag. "Officer Rahman. Your name means 'kind'. Please be kind. What does it hurt you to let just two women go? Why not release us? We are not criminals." "I cannot." "I beg you, please." "It is a matter of qanoon, hamshira, a matter of law," Rahman said, sounding serious and important. "It is my job, you see, to keep order." Even though she was very upset, Laila almost laughed. She was shocked he used that word, thinking of all the Mujahideen groups had done – the killing, stealing, rapes, torture, executions, bombs, the thousands of rockets they fired at each other, not caring about the innocent people caught in the middle. Order. But she didn't say anything. "If you send us back," she said slowly, "we don't know what he will do to us." She saw him try not to look away. "What a man does in his home is his business." "What about the law then, Officer Rahman?" Angry tears came to her eyes. "Will you be there to keep order?" "Our rule is, we do not get involved in private family matters, hamshira." "Of course you don't. When it helps the man. And isn't this a 'private family matter', as you call it? Isn't it?" He moved back from his desk and stood up, fixing his jacket. "I think this talk is finished. I must say, hamshira, you have not argued your case well. Not well at all. Now, please wait outside and I will talk to your... whoever she is." Laila started to argue, then to shout, and he had to call two other men to pull her out of his office. Mariam's talk lasted only a few minutes. When she came out, she looked scared. "He asked so many questions," she said. "I'm sorry, Laila jo. I am not clever like you. He asked so many questions, I didn't know the answers. I'm sorry." "It's not your fault, Mariam," Laila said softly. "It's mine. It's all my fault. Everything is my fault." *** It was after six o'clock when the police car stopped outside the house. Laila and Mariam sat in the back, watched by a soldier in the front seat. The driver got out, knocked on the door, and spoke to Rasheed. He then told them to come. "Welcome home," the man in the front seat said, lighting a cigarette. "YOU," he said to Mariam. "You wait here." Mariam sat quietly on the sofa. "You two, upstairs." Rasheed grabbed Laila's arm and pushed her up the stairs. He still had his work shoes on, hadn't changed or taken off his watch or coat. Laila imagined him earlier, rushing around, slamming doors, very angry and surprised, saying bad words quietly. At the top of the stairs, Laila turned to him. "She didn't want to do it," she said. "I made her do it. She didn't want to go—" Laila didn't see the punch coming. One second she was speaking, the next she was on her hands and knees, eyes wide and face red, trying to breathe. It felt like a car had hit her hard in the soft part between her chest and stomach. She realized she had dropped Aziza, and Aziza was screaming. She tried to breathe again but only made a rough, choking sound. Saliva hung from her mouth. Then he was pulling her by her hair. She saw Aziza lifted up, saw her small shoes fall off, her little feet kicking. Hair was pulled from Laila's head, and her eyes hurt with pain. She saw his foot kick open the door to Mariam's room, saw Aziza thrown onto the bed. He let go of Laila's hair, and she felt his shoe kick her left bottom. She cried out in pain as he closed the door hard. A key turned in the lock. Aziza was still screaming. Laila lay on the floor, breathing heavily. She pushed herself up, crawled to Aziza on the bed, and reached for her daughter. Downstairs, the beating started. To Laila, the sounds were regular and known. There were no shouts, no screams, no begging, no surprise cries, just the steady sound of beating and being beaten, a heavy 'thump, thump' hitting skin, someone hitting a wall with a 'thud', cloth tearing. Sometimes, Laila heard running, a chase without words, furniture falling over, glass breaking, then the thumping again. Laila held Aziza. A warm wetness spread down the front of her dress as Aziza wet herself. Downstairs, the running and chasing stopped. Now there was a sound like a wooden stick hitting a large piece of meat again and again. Laila rocked Aziza until the sounds stopped, and, when she heard the outside door open and close, she put Aziza down and looked out the window. She saw Rasheed leading Mariam across the yard by the back of her neck. Mariam was barefoot and bent over. There was blood on his hands, blood on Mariam's face, her hair, down her neck and back. Her shirt was torn open in the front. "I'm so sorry, Mariam," Laila cried against the glass. She watched him push Mariam into the toolshed. He went in, came out with a hammer and some long pieces of wood. He closed the two doors of the shed, took a key from his pocket, and locked it. He tested the doors, then went behind the shed and got a ladder. A few minutes later, his face was at Laila's window, nails in the corner of his mouth. His hair was messy. There was blood on his forehead. When Aziza saw him, she screamed and hid her face in Laila's armpit. Rasheed began nailing boards across the window. THE DARK was complete, impossible to see through, and always there, with no changes. Rasheed had filled the gaps between the boards with something and put a large, heavy thing at the bottom of the door so no light came in there. Something was put in the keyhole. Laila could not tell the time with her eyes, so she used her good ear. The call to prayer and roosters crowing meant morning. The sound of plates in the kitchen downstairs, the radio playing, meant evening. The first day, they felt around for each other in the dark. Laila could not see Aziza when she cried, when she crawled around. "Aishee," Aziza cried softly. "Aishee." "Soon." Laila kissed her daughter, aiming for her forehead but finding the top of her head. "We'll have milk soon. Just be patient. Be a good, patient little girl for Mammy, and I'll get you some aishee." Laila sang her some songs. The call to prayer happened a second time and Rasheed still hadn't given them any food, and, worse, no water. That day, a thick, heavy heat came down on them. The room became like a pressure cooker. Laila moved her dry tongue over her lips, thinking of the well outside, the water cold and fresh. Aziza kept crying, and Laila saw with worry that when she wiped her cheeks, her hands were dry. She took Aziza's clothes off, tried to find something to fan her with, and ended up blowing on her until she felt dizzy. Soon, Aziza stopped crawling. She fell asleep and woke up. Several times that day, Laila hit the walls with her fists, used all her energy screaming for help, hoping a neighbor would hear. But no one came, and her shouting only scared Aziza, who started to cry again, a weak, rough sound. Laila slid to the floor. She thought sadly of Mariam, beaten and bloody, locked in this heat in the toolshed. Laila fell asleep at some point, her body hot in the heat. She dreamed that she and Aziza had met Tariq. He was across a busy street from them, under a tailor's shop cover. He was sitting down and trying figs from a box. That's your father, Laila said. That man there, do you see him? He's your real baba. She called his name, but the street noise was too loud, and Tariq didn't hear. She woke up to the sound of rockets flying overhead. Somewhere, the sky she couldn't see filled with explosions and the fast sound of machine guns. Laila closed her eyes. She woke again to Rasheed's heavy footsteps in the hallway. She pulled herself to the door, hit it with her hands. "Just one glass, Rasheed. Not for me. Do it for her. You don't want her blood on your hands." He walked past. She began to beg him. She begged for forgiveness, made promises. She said bad things about him. His door closed. The radio came on. The call to prayer happened a third time. Again the heat. Aziza became even weaker. She stopped crying, stopped moving completely. Laila put her ear near Aziza's mouth, afraid each time that she would not hear the quiet sound of breathing. Even this simple action of lifting herself made her head spin. She fell asleep, had dreams she could not remember. When she woke up, she checked on Aziza, felt her dry, cracked lips, the weak beat at her neck, and lay down again. They would die here, Laila was sure now, but what she really feared was that she would live longer than Aziza, who was young and weak. How much more could Aziza take? Aziza would die in this heat, and Laila would have to lie next to her small, still body and wait for her own death. Again she fell asleep. Woke up. Fell asleep. The line between dreaming and being awake was unclear. It wasn't roosters or the call to prayer that woke her up again but the sound of something heavy being pulled. She heard a shaking sound. Suddenly, the room was filled with light. Her eyes hurt greatly. Laila raised her head, winced, and covered her eyes. Through her fingers, she saw a big, unclear shape standing in a rectangle of light. The shape moved. Now there was a shape bending down beside her, leaning over her, and a voice near her ear. "You try this again and I will find you. I promise on the Prophet's name that I will find you. And, when I do, there is no court in this terrible country that will blame me for what I will do. To Mariam first, then to her, and you last. I'll make you watch. Do you understand me? I'll make you watch." And, after saying that, he left the room. But not before kicking her side so hard that Laila would have blood in her urine for days. 37. Mariam SEPTEMBER 1996 Two and a half years later, Mariam woke up on the morning of September 27 to the sounds of shouting and whistling, fireworks and music. She ran to the living room, found Laila already at the window, Aziza sitting on her shoulders. Laila turned and smiled. "The Taliban are here," she said. MARIAM HAD first heard about the Taliban two years before, in October 1994, when Rasheed had brought home news that they had beaten the warlords in Kandahar and taken the city. They were a fighting group, he said, made up of young Pashtun men whose families had run away to Pakistan during the war against the Soviets. Most of them had grown up – some were even born – in camps for people who had left their homes, along the border with Pakistan, and in religious schools in Pakistan, where they learned the rules of Islam from religious leaders. Their leader was a strange, cannot-read, one-eyed man who stayed away from people named Mullah Omar, who, Rasheed said with some amusement, called himself Ameer-ul-Mumineen, Leader of the Faithful. "It's true that these boys have no risha, no roots," Rasheed said, speaking to no one in particular. Since the failed escape two and a half years ago, Mariam knew that she and Laila were the same to him, equally unhappy, equally not trusted, not respected, and not important. When he spoke, Mariam felt he was talking to himself, or to someone invisible in the room, who, unlike her and Laila, was worth listening to. "They may have no past," he said, smoking and looking at the ceiling. "They may know nothing of the world or this country's history. Yes. And, compared to them, Mariam here is like a university teacher. Ha! All true. But look around you. What do you see? Bad, greedy Mujahideen leaders, with lots of weapons, rich from drugs, fighting each other and killing everyone in between – that's what. At least the Taliban are pure and cannot be bought. At least they are good Muslim boys. I swear, when they come, they will clean this place up. They'll bring peace and order. People won't be shot anymore when they go out for milk. No more rockets! Think about it." For two years now, the Taliban had been moving towards Kabul, taking cities from the Mujahideen, stopping the fighting between groups wherever they settled. They had caught the Hazara leader Abdul Ali Mazari and killed him. For months, they had stayed in the southern part of Kabul, firing at the city, exchanging rockets with Ahmad Shah Massoud. Earlier in that September of 1996, they had taken the cities of Jalalabad and Sarobi. The Taliban had one thing the Mujahideen did not, Rasheed said. They were together. "Let them come," he said. "I, for one, will throw rose petals on them." *** THEY WENT OUT that day, all four of them, Rasheed leading them from one bus to the next, to see their new world, their new leaders. In every damaged area, Mariam saw people coming out of the broken buildings and going into the streets. She saw an old woman throwing handfuls of rice, throwing it at people passing by, with a sad, no-teeth smile. Two men were hugging by the remains of a burned building, and in the sky above them the sound of a few fireworks set off by boys on rooftops. The country's song played on tape players, competing with the sound of cars honking. "Look, Mayam!" Aziza pointed to a group of boys running down Jadeh Maywand. They were hitting the air with their fists and pulling old cans tied to strings. They were shouting that Massoud and Rabbani had left Kabul. Everywhere, people were shouting: Allah-u-akbar! Mariam saw a bedsheet hanging from a window on Jadeh Maywand. On it, someone had painted three words in big, black letters: ZENDA BAAD TALIBAN! Long live the Taliban! As they walked the streets, Mariam saw more signs – painted on windows, nailed to doors, flying from car antennas – saying the same thing. MARIAM SAW HER first of the Taliban later that day, at Pashtunistan Square, with Rasheed, Laila, and Aziza. A large group of people had gathered there. Mariam saw people stretching their necks to see, people crowded around the blue water in the middle of the square, people sitting on its dry bottom. They were trying to see the end of the square, near the old Khyber Restaurant. Rasheed used his size to push past the people watching, and led them to where someone was speaking through a loudspeaker. When Aziza saw, she screamed and hid her face in Mariam's burqa. The loudspeaker voice belonged to a thin, bearded young man wearing a black turban. He was standing on a临时 structure. In his free hand, he held a rocket launcher. Beside him, two bloody men hung from ropes tied to traffic light posts. Their clothes were torn. Their swollen faces had turned purple-blue. "I know him," Mariam said, "the one on the left." A young woman in front of Mariam turned around and said it was Najibullah. The other man was his brother. Mariam remembered Najibullah's round face with a mustache, smiling from posters and shop windows during the Soviet time. She would later hear that the Taliban had pulled Najibullah from his safe place at the UN building near Darulaman Palace. That they had tortured him for hours, then tied his legs to a truck and pulled his dead body through the streets. "He killed many, many Muslims!" the young Talib was shouting through the loudspeaker. He spoke the Farsi language with a Pashto sound, then would change to Pashto. He made his points by pointing to the dead bodies with his weapon. "His crimes are known to everyone. He was a communist and did not believe in God. This is what we do with people who do not believe in God and do crimes against Islam!" Rasheed was smiling slightly. In Mariam's arms, Aziza began to cry. THE NEXT DAY, Kabul was full of trucks. In different parts of the city, red Toyota trucks drove through the streets. Armed, bearded men in black turbans sat in the back. From each truck, a loudspeaker played announcements, first in Farsi, then Pashto. The same message played from loudspeakers on top of mosques, and on the radio, which was now called the Voice of Shari’a. The message was also written on papers, thrown into the streets. Mariam found one in the yard. Our country is now called the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. These are the laws that we will make you follow and you will obey: All citizens must pray five times a day. If it is prayer time and you are caught doing something else, you will be beaten. All men will grow their beards. The correct length is at least the size of a closed hand below the chin. If you do not follow this, you will be beaten. All boys will wear turbans. Boys in grades one to six will wear black turbans, higher grades will wear white. All boys will wear Islamic clothes. Shirt collars will be buttoned. Singing is not allowed. Dancing is not allowed. Playing cards, playing chess, betting money, and flying kites are not allowed. Writing books, watching films, and painting pictures are not allowed. If you keep small birds (parakeets), you will be beaten. Your birds will be killed. If you steal, your hand will be cut off at the wrist. If you steal again, your foot will be cut off. If you are not Muslim, do not worship where Muslims can see you. If you do, you will be beaten and put in prison. If you are caught trying to make a Muslim change to your religion, you will be executed. Attention women: You will stay inside your homes at all times. It is not right for women to walk around the streets without a reason. If you go outside, you must be with a mahram, a male family member. If you are caught alone on the street, you will be beaten and sent home. You will not, ever, show your face. You will cover with a burqa when outside. If you do not, you will be badly beaten. Makeup is not allowed. Jewelry is not allowed. You will not wear attractive clothes. You will not speak unless someone speaks to you. You will not look men in the eye. You will not laugh in public. If you do, you will be beaten. You will not paint your nails. If you do, you will lose a finger. Girls are not allowed to go to school. All schools for girls will be closed immediately. Women are not allowed to work. If you are found guilty of adultery (sex outside marriage), you will be killed by stones. Listen. Listen carefully. Obey. Allah-u-akbar. Rasheed turned off the radio. They were sitting on the living room floor, eating dinner less than a week after they had seen Najibullah's dead body hanging from a rope. "They can't make half the people stay home and do nothing," Laila said. "Why not?" Rasheed said. For once, Mariam agreed with him. He had done the same thing to her and Laila, in a way, hadn't he? Surely Laila saw that. "This isn't a small village. This is Kabul. Women here used to work as lawyers and doctors; they had jobs in the government—" Rasheed smiled. "You sound like the proud daughter of a poetry-reading university man that you are. How modern, how Tajik, of you. You think this is some new, extreme idea the Taliban are bringing? Have you ever lived outside your precious little bubble in Kabul, my flower? Ever cared to visit the real Afghanistan, the south, the east, near the tribal border with Pakistan? No? I have. And I can tell you that there are many places in this country that have always lived like this, or almost like this anyway. Not that you would know." "I refuse to believe it," Laila said. "They are not serious." "What the Taliban did to Najibullah looked serious to me," Rasheed said. "Wouldn't you agree?" "He was a communist! He was the head of the Secret Police." Rasheed laughed. Mariam heard the answer in his laugh: that in the eyes of the Taliban, being a communist and the head of the feared KHAD group made Najibullah only a little more bad than a woman. 38. Laila FALL 1999 Laila was glad, when the Taliban started their work, that Babi wasn't there to see it. It would have broken him. Men with tools attacked the old Kabul Museum and broke statues from before Islam into pieces – the ones that hadn't already been stolen by the Mujahideen. The university was closed and its students sent home. Paintings were pulled from walls, cut with knives. Television screens were broken. Books, except for the Koran, were burned in piles, the shops that sold them closed. The poems of many famous poets were burned. Laila heard of men being pulled from the streets, accused of not praying, and pushed into mosques. She learned that Marco Polo Restaurant, near Chicken Street, had become a place for questioning people. Sometimes screaming was heard from behind its windows painted black. Everywhere, the 'Beard Patrol' drove in Toyota trucks looking for men with no beards to beat. They closed the cinemas too. Different cinemas were closed. The rooms where films were shown were damaged and film rolls were set on fire. Laila remembered all the times she and Tariq had sat in those cinemas and watched Indian films, all those sad stories of lovers separated by bad luck, one far away, the other forced to marry, the crying, the singing in fields of flowers, wanting to be together again. She remembered how Tariq would laugh at her for crying at those films. "I wonder what they've done to my father's cinema," Mariam said to her one day. "If it's still there. Or if he still owns it." Kharabat, Kabul's old music area, became quiet. Musicians were beaten and put in prison, their musical tools broken. The Taliban went to the grave of Tariq's favorite singer, Ahmad Zahir, and shot bullets into it. "He's been dead for almost twenty years," Laila said to Mariam. "Isn't dying once enough?" RASHEED wasn't bothered much by the Taliban. All he had to do was grow a beard, which he did, and visit the mosque, which he also did. Rasheed looked at the Taliban with a kind, almost funny feeling, like someone looking at a strange cousin who sometimes does funny and shocking things. Every Wednesday night, Rasheed listened to the Voice of Shari’a when the Taliban would announce the names of those who would be punished. Then, on Fridays, he went to Ghazi Stadium, bought a drink, and watched the show. In bed, he made Laila listen as he described with a strange excitement the hands he had seen cut off, the whippings, the hangings, the cutting off of heads. "I saw a man today cut the throat of his brother's killer," he said one night, blowing smoke rings. "They are wild people," Laila said. "You think?" he said. "Compared to what? The Soviets killed a million people. Do you know how many people the Mujahideen killed in Kabul alone these last four years? Fifty thousand. Fifty thousand! Is it so crazy, compared to that, to chop off the hands of a few thieves? An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. It's in the Koran. Besides, tell me this: If someone killed Aziza, wouldn't you want the chance to get revenge for her?" Laila gave him a look of disgust. "I'm making a point," he said. "You are just like them." "She has an interesting eye color, Aziza. Don't you think? It's not yours or mine." Rasheed turned to face her, gently scratched her leg with his bent fingernail. "Let me explain," he said. "If I felt like it – and I'm not saying I will, but I could – I could – I would have the right to give Aziza away. How would you like that? Or I could go to the Taliban one day, just walk in and say that I suspect things about you. That's all it would take. Whose word do you think they would believe? What do you think they'd do to you?" Laila pulled her leg away from him. "Not that I would," he said. "I wouldn't. No. Probably not. You know me." "You are horrible," Laila said. "That's a big word," Rasheed said. "I have always disliked that about you. Even when you were little, when you were running around with that disabled boy, you thought you were so smart, with your books and poems. What good are all your smarts to you now? What is keeping you off the streets, your smarts or me? I'm horrible? Half the women in this city would kill to have a husband like me. They would kill for it." He rolled back and blew smoke towards the ceiling. "You like big words? I'll give you one: perspective. That's what I'm doing here, Laila. Making sure you don't lose perspective." What made Laila feel sick the rest of the night was that every word Rasheed had said, every single one, was true. But, in the morning, and for several mornings after, the sick feeling in her stomach stayed, then got worse, became something she knew sadly. ONE COLD, cloudy afternoon soon after, Laila lay on her back on the bedroom floor. Mariam was sleeping with Aziza in her room. In Laila's hands was a metal spoke she had broken off a bicycle wheel with a tool. She had found it in the same narrow street where she had kissed Tariq years before. For a long time, Laila lay on the floor, breathing in sharply through her teeth, her legs apart. She had loved Aziza from the moment she first thought she was pregnant. There had been no doubt, no uncertainty. What a terrible thing it was, Laila thought now, for a mother to fear that she could not feel love for her own child. What an unnatural thing. And yet she had to wonder, as she lay on the floor, her wet hands ready to guide the spoke, if she could ever truly love Rasheed's child as she had loved Tariq's. In the end, Laila couldn't do it. It wasn't the fear of bleeding to death that made her drop the spoke, or even the idea that the action was wrong – which she thought it probably was. Laila dropped the spoke because she could not accept what the Mujahideen had easily accepted: that sometimes in war innocent life had to be taken. Her war was against Rasheed. The baby was innocent. And there had been enough killing already. Laila had seen enough killing of innocent people caught between enemies. 39. Mariam SEPTEMBER 1997 "This hospital no longer treats women," the guard shouted. He was standing at the top of the stairs, looking down coldly at the crowd in front of Malalai Hospital. A loud sound of disappointment rose from the crowd. "But this is a women's hospital!" a woman shouted behind Mariam. Others agreed loudly. Mariam moved Aziza from one arm to the other. With her free arm, she supported Laila, who was making sounds of pain, and had her arm around Rasheed's neck. "Not anymore," the Talib said. "My wife is having a baby!" a heavy man shouted. "Would you have her give birth here on the street, brother?" Mariam had heard the announcement, in January of that year, that men and women would be seen in different hospitals, that all female staff would be sent away from Kabul's hospitals to work in one main place. No one had believed it, and the Taliban hadn't made them follow it. Until now. "What about Ali Abad Hospital?" another man cried. The guard shook his head. "Wazir Akbar Khan?" "Men only," he said. "What should we do?" "Go to Rabia Balkhi," the guard said. A young woman came forward, said she had already been there. They had no clean water, she said, no oxygen, no medicines, no electricity. "There is nothing there." "That's where you go," the guard said. There were more sounds of disappointment and crying, an insult or two. Someone threw a rock. The Talib lifted his gun and fired shots into the air. Another Talib behind him showed a whip. The crowd quickly moved away. THE WAITING ROOM at Rabia Balkhi was full of women in burqas and their children. The air smelled bad from sweat and bodies that hadn't been washed, from feet, urine, cigarette smoke, and cleaning liquid. Under the slow ceiling fan, children chased each other, stepping over the legs of sleeping fathers stretched out on the floor. Mariam helped Laila sit against a wall where pieces of plaster shaped like foreign countries had fallen off. Laila rocked back and forth, pressing her hands against her stomach. "I'll get you seen, Laila jo. I promise." "Be quick," said Rasheed. In front of the window where you register was a crowd of women, pushing each other. Some were still holding their babies. Some broke away and ran towards the doors that led to the treatment rooms. An armed Talib guard blocked their way, sending them back. Mariam stepped into the crowd. She stood firm and pushed against the elbows, hips, and shoulders of strangers. Someone elbowed her in the ribs, and she elbowed back. A hand reached out desperately towards her face. She hit it away. To move forward, Mariam used her nails on necks, arms, elbows, hair, and, when a woman nearby made a sharp sound, Mariam made one back. Mariam saw now the things a mother gave up. Being polite was just one. She thought sadly of Nana, of the things she had also given up. Nana, who could have given her away, or left her in a ditch somewhere and run away. But she hadn't. Instead, Nana had suffered the shame of having a child outside marriage, had built her life around the hard job of raising Mariam and, in her own way, loving her. And, in the end, Mariam had chosen Jalil instead of her. As she fought her way with brave determination to the front of the crowd, Mariam wished she had been a better daughter to Nana. She wished she had understood then what she understood now about being a mother. She found herself facing a nurse, who was covered completely in a dirty gray burqa. The nurse was talking to a young woman, whose burqa head covering was wet with a patch of blood. "My daughter's water broke and the baby won't come," Mariam called. "I'm talking to her!" the young woman with blood cried. "Wait your turn!" The whole crowd moved from side to side, like tall grass when the wind blows. A woman behind Mariam was shouting that her girl had broken her elbow falling from a tree. Another woman cried that she was passing bloody waste. "Does she have a fever?" the nurse asked. It took Mariam a moment to realize she was being spoken to. "No," Mariam said. "Bleeding?" "No." "Where is she?" Over the covered heads, Mariam pointed to where Laila was sitting with Rasheed. "We'll get to her," the nurse said. "How long?" Mariam cried. Someone had grabbed her shoulders and was pulling her back. "I don't know," the nurse said. She said they had only two doctors and both were operating now. "She's in pain," Mariam said. "Me too!" the woman with the bloody head cried. "Wait your turn!" Mariam was being pulled back. Her view of the nurse was blocked now by shoulders and the backs of heads. She smelled a baby's milky burp. "Take her for a walk," the nurse yelled. "And wait." IT WAS DARK outside when a nurse finally called them in. The delivery room had eight beds, where women made sounds of pain and twisted, cared for by nurses covered completely. Two of the women were giving birth. There were no curtains between the beds. Laila was given a bed at the far end, under a window that someone had painted black. There was a sink nearby, broken and dry, and a string over the sink with dirty medical gloves hanging from it with clips. In the middle of the room Mariam saw a metal table. The top shelf had a dirty blanket on it; the bottom shelf was empty. One of the women saw Mariam looking. "They put the ones who live on the top," she said tiredly. The doctor, in a dark blue burqa, was a small, busy woman who moved quickly like a bird. Everything she said sounded impatient, urgent. "First baby." She said it like that, not as a question but a statement. "Second," Mariam said. Laila cried out and rolled onto her side. Her fingers closed tightly on Mariam's. "Any problems with the first birth?" "No." "You are the mother?" "Yes," Mariam said. The doctor lifted the bottom part of her burqa and took out a metal, cone-shaped tool. She lifted Laila's burqa and put the wide end of the tool on her stomach, the narrow end to her own ear. She listened for almost a minute, changed places, listened again, changed places again. "I have to feel the baby now, hamshira." She put on one of the gloves hanging by a clip over the sink. She pushed on Laila's stomach with one hand and put the other inside. Laila made a quiet sound of pain. When the doctor finished, she gave the glove to a nurse, who washed it and pinned it back on the string. "Your daughter needs a caesarian. Do you know what that is? We have to open her womb and take the baby out, because it is in the wrong position." "I don't understand," Mariam said. The doctor said the baby was positioned so it would not come out by itself. "And too much time has passed already. We need to go to the operating room now." Laila nodded, making a face of pain, and her head dropped to one side. "There is something I have to tell you," the doctor said. She moved closer to Mariam, leaned in, and spoke in a quieter, more private voice. There was a little shame in her voice now. "What is she saying?" Laila moaned. "Is something wrong with the baby?" "But how will she stand it?" Mariam said. The doctor must have heard blame in this question, judging by the way she answered defensively. "You think I want it this way?" she said. "What do you want me to do? They won't give me what I need. I have no X-ray either, no suction tools, no oxygen, not even simple medicines to fight sickness. When groups that help offer money, the Taliban send them away. Or they send the money to the places that are for men." "But, Doctor sahib, isn't there something you can give her?" Mariam asked. "What's happening?" Laila moaned. She had pushed herself up on her elbows. The doctor took a breath, then told Laila that the hospital had no pain medicine. "But if we wait, you will lose your baby." "Then cut me open," Laila said. She fell back on the bed and pulled her knees up. "Cut me open and give me my baby." *** INSIDE THE OLD, DIRTY operating room, Laila lay on a movable bed as the doctor washed her hands in a bowl. Laila was shaking. She breathed in sharply through her teeth every time the nurse cleaned her stomach with a cloth wet with a yellow-brown liquid. Another nurse stood at the door. She kept opening it a little to look outside. The doctor was out of her burqa now, and Mariam saw that she had gray hair on top, tired-looking eyes, and small bags of tiredness at the sides of her mouth. "They want us to operate in a burqa," the doctor explained, pointing with her head to the nurse at the door. "She watches. If she sees them coming; I cover myself." She said this in a practical, almost uninterested way, and Mariam understood that this was a woman who was far past being angry. Here was a woman, she thought, who had understood that she was lucky to even be working, that there was always something, something else, that they could take away. There were two straight, metal poles on either side of Laila's shoulders. With clips, the nurse who had cleaned Laila's stomach clipped a sheet to them. It made a curtain between Laila and the doctor. Mariam stood behind Laila's head and lowered her face so their cheeks touched. She could feel Laila's teeth shaking. Their hands held each other tightly. Through the curtain, Mariam saw the doctor's shadow move to Laila's left, the nurse to the right. Laila's lips were pulled back completely. Saliva bubbles formed and popped on her tightly closed teeth. She made quick, small sounds of pain. The doctor said, "Be strong, little sister." She bent over Laila. Laila's eyes opened suddenly. Then her mouth opened. She held like this, held, held, shaking, the muscles in her neck tight, sweat dripping from her face, her fingers crushing Mariam's. Mariam would always admire Laila for how much time passed before she screamed. 40. Laila FALL 1999 It was Mariam's idea to dig the hole. One morning, she pointed to a patch of ground behind the toolshed. "We can do it here," she said. "This is a good place." They took turns hitting the ground with a spade, then moving the loose dirt aside with a shovel. They hadn't planned a big hole, or a deep one, so the work of digging should not have been as hard as it turned out. It was the drought, which started in 1998, now in its second year, that was causing problems everywhere. It had hardly snowed that past winter and didn't rain at all that spring. All over the country, farmers were leaving their dry lands, selling their things, going from village to village looking for water. They moved to Pakistan or Iran. They settled in Kabul. But water levels were low in the city too, and the shallow wells had dried up. The lines at the deep wells were so long, Laila and Mariam would spend hours waiting for their turn. The Kabul River, without its yearly spring floods, had become completely dry. It was a public toilet now, with nothing in it but human waste and broken materials. So they kept swinging the spade and hitting, but the ground, burned by the sun, had become hard like a rock, the dirt hard, pressed together, almost like stone. Mariam was forty now. Her hair, tied up, had a few gray lines in it. Bags hung under her eyes, brown and curved. She had lost two front teeth. One fell out, the other Rasheed knocked out when she had accidentally dropped Zalmai. Her skin was rougher, tanned from all the time they were spending in the yard sitting under the strong sun. They would sit and watch Zalmai chase Aziza. When it was finished, when the hole was dug, they stood over it and looked down. "It should be enough," Mariam said. ZALMAI WAS TWO now. He was a plump little boy with curly hair. He had small brownish eyes, and rosy cheeks, like Rasheed, no matter the weather. He had his father's hairline too, thick and shaped like a half-moon, low on his forehead. When Laila was alone with him, Zalmai was sweet, happy, and liked to play. He liked to climb on Laila's shoulders, play hide-and-seek in the yard with her and Aziza. Sometimes, when he was calmer, he liked to sit on Laila's lap and have her sing to him. His favorite song was "Mullah Mohammad Jan." He swung his little chubby feet as she sang into his curly hair and joined in when she got to the main part of the song, singing the words he could with his rough voice: Come and let's go to Mazar, Mullah Mohammad jan, To see the fields of tulips, o beloved companion. Laila loved the wet kisses Zalmai gave her cheeks, loved his small dimples on his elbows and his short little toes. She loved tickling him, building tunnels with pillows and cushions for him to crawl through, watching him fall asleep in her arms with one of his hands always holding her ear. Her stomach hurt when she thought of that afternoon, lying on the floor with the spoke of a bicycle wheel between her legs. How close she had come. It was impossible for her to think now that she could have even thought about it. Her son was a gift, and Laila was happy to find that her fears were not true, that she loved Zalmai deeply, just as she did Aziza. But Zalmai loved his father very much, and, because he did, he changed when his father was around to give him attention. Zalmai was quick then with a challenging laugh or a rude smile. When his father was present, he was easily offended. He held on to anger. He continued to do bad things even when Laila told him off, which he never did when Rasheed was away. Rasheed approved of all of it. "A sign of intelligence," he said.He said the same about Zalmai being careless. For example, when he ate marbles and then they came out when he went to the toilet. When he played with matches. When he chewed Rasheed's cigarettes. When Zalmai was born, Rasheed moved him into the bed he shared with Laila. He bought him a new bed for babies and had pictures of lions and leopards painted on the sides. He paid for new clothes, toys that make noise, bottles, and nappies. They didn't have much money, and Aziza's old things were still good, but he bought new things for Zalmai. One day, he came home with a toy that moved by itself. It hung over Zalmai's bed. Small yellow and black bees hung from a sunflower. They made a noise when you squeezed them. Music played when it was on. Laila said, "I thought you said your business was not doing well." Rasheed said, "I have friends I can borrow money from." Laila asked, "How will you give them back the money?" He said, "Things will get better. They always do. Look, he likes it. See?" Most days, Laila could not spend time with her son. Rasheed took him to the shop. He let him play on the floor under his table where he worked. Zalmai played with old shoe parts and pieces of leather. Rasheed hit nails into shoes and used the machine to make things smooth. He watched Zalmai carefully. If Zalmai knocked over shoes, Rasheed spoke to him gently, in a calm way, with a small smile. If he did it again, Rasheed stopped working, put Zalmai on his desk, and talked to him softly. Rasheed was very patient with Zalmai. In the evening, they came home together. Zalmai's head was on Rasheed's shoulder. They both smelled of glue and leather. They smiled like people who have a secret. They looked like they had spent the day planning secrets, not making shoes. Zalmai liked to sit next to his father at dinner. They played private games while Mariam, Laila, and Aziza put plates on the cloth on the floor. They took turns poking each other, laughing quietly, throwing small pieces of bread at each other. They whispered things the others could not hear. If Laila spoke to them, Rasheed looked annoyed because she interrupted. If she asked to hold Zalmai, or if Zalmai reached for her, Rasheed looked at her angrily. Laila felt hurt and walked away. THEN ONE NIGHT, a few weeks after Zalmai was two years old, Rasheed came home with a television and a video player. The day was warm, but the evening became colder and dark. He put it on the table in the living room. He said he bought it on the black market, which is illegal selling. Laila asked, "Another loan?" He said, "It's a Magnavox," which is a brand name. Aziza came into the room. When she saw the TV, she ran to it. Mariam said, "Be careful, Aziza. Don't touch." Aziza's hair was now light like Laila's. Laila could see her own small holes in her cheeks on Aziza's face. Aziza had become a calm, thoughtful little girl. She seemed older than her six years. Laila was surprised by how Aziza spoke, how she paused and changed her voice, like an adult. This was strange because her body was small. Aziza took care of Zalmai every day without being asked. She woke him up, dressed him, gave him breakfast, and brushed his hair. She was the one who put him to sleep in the afternoon. She was calm and tried to stop arguments with her brother, who often got angry. When she was with Zalmai, Aziza often shook her head like she was tired, like an adult. Aziza pushed the TV's power button. Rasheed looked angry. He quickly grabbed her wrist and put it on the table. He was not gentle. He said, "This is Zalmai's TV." Aziza went to Mariam and sat on her lap. They were very close now. Lately, Laila had said it was okay for Mariam to teach Aziza parts of the Koran. Aziza could already say some important prayers by heart. She also knew how to do the morning prayer. Mariam had said to Laila, "This knowledge, these prayers, are all I have to give her. They are the only true things I have ever owned." Zalmai came into the room now. Rasheed watched with excitement, like people watch simple magic tricks. Zalmai pulled the TV wire, pushed the buttons, and put his hands on the black screen. When he lifted them, the wet marks of his hands disappeared from the glass. Rasheed smiled with pride. He watched Zalmai keep pressing his hands and lifting them, again and again. The Taliban had said that television was not allowed. They had broken video tapes in public. They had hung satellite dishes from street lights. But Rasheed said that just because things were not allowed didn't mean you couldn't find them. "I'll start looking for some cartoon videos tomorrow," he said. "It won't be hard. You can buy anything in secret markets." Laila said, "Then maybe you'll buy us a new water well." Rasheed looked at her with anger. It was later, after they had eaten plain white rice again for dinner, and did not have tea because there was no water. After Rasheed had smoked a cigarette, he told Laila about his plan. "No," Laila said. He said he was not asking her. "I don't care if you are or not." "You would if you knew everything." He said he had borrowed money from more friends than he told her. He said the money from his shop was not enough to feed all five of them anymore. "I didn't tell you before so you wouldn't worry." He also said, "You would be surprised how much money they can make." Laila said no again. They were in the living room. Mariam and the children were in the kitchen. Laila could hear the sound of plates, Zalmai laughing loudly, Aziza talking to Mariam in her calm, sensible voice. "There will be others like her, even younger," Rasheed said. "Everyone in Kabul is doing the same thing." Laila told him she didn't care what other people did with their children. "I'll watch her closely," Rasheed said, less patiently now. "It's a safe place. There's a mosque across the street." "I will not let you make my daughter a beggar on the street!" Laila shouted. Rasheed hit her cheek hard with his hand. It made a loud noise. It made her head turn quickly. It stopped the sounds from the kitchen. For a moment, the house was completely quiet. Then there were quick steps in the hallway. Mariam and the children came into the living room. They looked from Laila to Rasheed and back. Then Laila hit him with her fist. It was the first time she had ever hit anyone, except for playing punches with Tariq. But those were gentle, like pats, not real punches. They were friendly ways of showing feelings that were confusing and exciting. They used to hit the muscle in the arm that Tariq, like a teacher, called the deltoid. Laila watched her closed hand move quickly through the air. She felt Rasheed's rough skin under her fingers. It made a sound like dropping a bag of rice on the floor. She hit him hard. He actually moved back two steps because of the hit. From the other side of the room, someone gasped, someone cried out, and someone screamed. Laila didn't know who made which noise. At that moment, she was too surprised to notice or care. She waited for her mind to understand what her hand had done. When it did, she thought she might have smiled. She might have smiled when, surprisingly, Rasheed calmly walked out of the room. Suddenly, Laila felt that all the hard times they had lived through—hers, Aziza's, Mariam's—just disappeared. It felt like it was worth it, even if it seemed strange, to have suffered all they had suffered for this one important moment. For this act of fighting back that would end all their bad treatment. Laila did not notice that Rasheed was back in the room. Not until his hand was around her neck. Not until he lifted her off the floor and pushed her hard against the wall. Close up, his angry face seemed very big. Laila noticed how much bigger his face was getting as he got older. She saw how many more small red lines were on his nose. Rasheed didn't say anything. And what could be said? What needed to be said when you had pushed the end of your gun into your wife's mouth? It was because of the raids, the times the Taliban searched houses, that they were digging in the yard. Sometimes the raids happened once a month, sometimes every week. Lately, they happened almost every day. Most times, the Taliban took things, kicked someone, or hit the back of someone's head. But sometimes they beat people in public, hitting their feet and hands. "Gently," Mariam said now, kneeling on the edge of the hole. They lowered the TV into the hole. Each of them held one end of the plastic sheet it was wrapped in. "That should be good," Mariam said. They patted the dirt when they finished, filling the hole again. They spread some dirt around so it didn't look like they had dug there. "There," Mariam said, cleaning her hands on her dress. They agreed that when it was safer, when the Taliban raided less often, in a month or two or six, or maybe longer, they would dig the TV up. IN LAILA'S DREAM, she and Mariam are outside behind the small building again, digging. But this time, they are lowering Aziza into the ground. Aziza's breath makes fog on the plastic sheet they have wrapped her in. Laila sees her scared eyes. She sees the white colour of her hands as they hit and push against the plastic. Aziza begs. Laila cannot hear her screams. Laila says quietly to Aziza in the dream, 'Only for a little while, it's only for a little while. It's because of the raids, my love, don't you know? When the raids are finished, Mammy and Auntie Mariam will dig you out. I promise, my love. Then we can play. We can play as much as you want.' She fills the tool used for digging with dirt. Laila woke up quickly, not able to breathe well. She had a taste of soil in her mouth when the first small pieces of dirt hit the plastic in her dream. 41. Mariam In the summer of the year 2000, the time with little rain was in its third and worst year. In some areas, villages became like groups of people who move from place to place. They were always moving, looking for water and green land for their animals. When they could not find water or green land, when their animals died, they came to Kabul. They went to the hillside near the city. They lived in poor, temporary homes, crowded together, fifteen or twenty people in one small hut. That was also the summer of the movie Titanic. That summer, Mariam and Aziza were often together, rolling and laughing. Aziza always said she wanted to be the character called Jack. "Be quiet, Aziza." "Jack! Say my name, Auntie Mariam. Say it. Jack!" "Your father will be angry if you wake him." "Jack! And you're Rose." It would end with Mariam lying on her back, giving up, agreeing to be Rose again. "Okay, you be Jack," she said. "You die young, and I get to live to be very old." "Yes, but I die a hero," said Aziza. "While you, Rose, you spend your whole, unhappy life wanting me." Then, sitting on Mariam's chest, she would say, "Now we must kiss!" Mariam quickly moved her head from side to side. Aziza was happy with her own naughty behaviour and laughed with her lips pushed out for a kiss. Sometimes Zalmai would walk in and watch this game. He asked what he could be. Aziza said, "You can be the iceberg." That summer, everyone in Kabul was very interested in the movie Titanic. People secretly brought copies of the film from Pakistan. Sometimes they hid them in their clothes. After the time the government said people must be inside, everyone locked their doors, turned off the lights, turned down the sound, and cried for Jack and Rose and the people on the ship that sank. If there was electricity, Mariam, Laila, and the children watched it too. They dug up the TV from behind the small building more than ten times. They did this late at night, with the lights off and blankets covering the windows. By the Kabul River, sellers moved into the dry riverbed. Soon, in the dry parts of the river, you could buy carpets with Titanic pictures, and cloth with Titanic pictures, from rolls of cloth in wheelbarrows. There was Titanic deodorant, Titanic toothpaste, Titanic perfume, fried food called pakora with the name Titanic, even clothes that cover the whole body called burqas with the name Titanic. A beggar who often asked for money started calling himself "Titanic Beggar." A place was called "Titanic City." People said, 'It's the song.' 'No, the sea.' 'The expensive things.' 'The ship.' 'It's the sex,' they whispered. Aziza said shyly, 'Leo. It's all about Leo.' Laila said to Mariam, "Everyone wants Jack. That's what it is. Everyone wants Jack to save them from danger. But there is no Jack. Jack is not coming back. Jack is dead." THEN, late that summer, a man who sold cloth fell asleep and forgot to put out his cigarette. He lived through the fire, but his shop did not. The fire also burned the cloth shop next to it, a shop selling old clothes, a small shop selling furniture, and a place where they made bread. They told Rasheed later that if the wind had blown east instead of west, his shop, which was on the corner of the block, might not have burned. THEY SOLD EVERYTHING. First, Mariam's things were sold, then Laila's. Aziza's baby clothes, the few toys Laila had argued with Rasheed to buy her. Aziza watched quietly. Rasheed's watch was also sold, his old radio, his two neckties, his shoes, and his wedding ring. The sofa, the table, the rug, and the chairs were sold too. Zalmai was very angry and cried a lot when Rasheed sold the TV. After the fire, Rasheed was home almost every day. He hit Aziza. He kicked Mariam. He threw things. He found reasons to be angry with Laila. The way she smelled, the way she dressed, the way she brushed her hair, her teeth that were becoming yellow. He said, "What happened to you? I married a beautiful woman, and now I have a terrible old woman. You are becoming like Mariam." He lost his job at the place that sold meat cooked on sticks because he fought with a customer. The customer said Rasheed had put the bread on his table in a rude way. They said angry words. Rasheed had called the customer a monkey-faced Uzbek. Someone showed a gun. Someone else showed a metal stick used for cooking. In Rasheed's story, he held the metal stick. Mariam was not sure if that was true. He lost his job at the restaurant because customers complained they had to wait a long time. Rasheed said the cook was slow and lazy. Laila said, "You were probably sleeping outside in the back." Mariam said, "Don't make him angry, Laila." Rasheed said, "I am warning you, woman." Laila said, "Either that or smoking." Rasheed said, "I promise to God." Laila said, "You cannot help being the way you are." And then he hit Laila. He hit her chest, her head, her stomach with his fists. He pulled her hair. He pushed her against the wall. Aziza was screaming, pulling at his shirt. Zalmai was screaming too, trying to get him off his mother. Rasheed pushed the children away. He pushed Laila to the ground and started kicking her. Mariam threw herself on top of Laila. He kept kicking. Now he was kicking Mariam. Spit was coming from his mouth. His eyes looked like he wanted to kill them. He kicked until he was too tired to kick anymore. "I promise you are going to make me kill you, Laila," he said, breathing heavily. Then he quickly left the house. WHEN THE MONEY was finished, hunger started to make their lives difficult. Mariam was surprised how quickly finding food became the most important thing in their lives. Rice boiled simply, with no meat or sauce, was special now. They often did not eat meals. Sometimes Rasheed brought home small fish in a can and hard, dry bread that tasted like wood dust. Sometimes he brought home apples he had stolen, even though he could lose his hand if he was caught. In food shops, he carefully put canned food in his pocket. They shared it five ways, and Zalmai got the biggest part. They ate raw white vegetables called turnips with salt. They ate soft leaves of a green plant and black bananas for dinner. The idea of dying from hunger suddenly seemed possible. Some people decided not to wait. Mariam heard about a woman in the area whose husband had died. She had crushed some dry bread, put poison for rats in it, and fed it to all seven of her children. She had saved the largest part for herself. Aziza's bones in her sides started to show through her skin. The fat from her cheeks disappeared. Her lower legs became thin, and her skin turned a light brown colour. When Mariam picked her up, she could feel her hip bone pushing through the tight skin. Zalmai lay around the house. His eyes were not bright and were half closed. Or he lay on his father's lap, not moving, like a piece of cloth. He cried until he fell asleep, if he had the energy. But he did not sleep well. White spots appeared before Mariam's eyes whenever she stood up. Her head felt like it was spinning, and her ears made noise all the time. She remembered something her old teacher used to say about hunger when the time of not eating for religious reasons started: Even a man bitten by a snake can sleep, but a hungry man cannot. Laila said, "My children are going to die. Right in front of my eyes." "They are not," Mariam said. "I will not let them. It will be okay, Laila. I know what to do." ONE VERY HOT DAY, Mariam put on her full body covering. She and Rasheed walked to the Intercontinental Hotel. Paying for a bus was too expensive now. Mariam was very tired when they reached the top of the steep hill. As she walked up the hill, she felt dizzy many times. Twice she had to stop and wait for the feeling to go away. At the hotel entrance, Rasheed greeted and hugged one of the men who opened doors. He was wearing a red suit and a hat. They talked like friends. Rasheed spoke with his hand on the doorman's arm. At one point, he pointed towards Mariam, and they both looked at her quickly. Mariam thought the doorman looked a little familiar. When the doorman went inside, Mariam and Rasheed waited. From this high place, Mariam could see the engineering school, and beyond that, the old part of the city and the road to another city. To the south, she could see the bread factory, which had not been used for a long time. Its light yellow front had many large holes from fighting. Further south, she could see the empty buildings of the old palace. Many years ago, Rasheed had taken her there for a meal outside. The memory of that day felt like something from a past that was not hers anymore. Mariam thought about these things, these famous places. She was afraid she would lose her courage if she let her mind think about other things. Every few minutes, cars drove up to the hotel entrance. Doormen quickly went to greet the people getting out. They were all men. They had guns, beards, and wore head covers. They all got out with the same confident, relaxed look of danger. Mariam heard parts of their conversations as they went inside the hotel doors. She heard languages from Afghanistan, but also from Pakistan and Arab countries. Rasheed said quietly, "Meet our real bosses. People from Pakistan and Arab countries who believe in a strict form of Islam. The Taliban are like dolls they control. These are the powerful people, and Afghanistan is where they play their games." Rasheed said he had heard that the Taliban were letting these people build secret training places all over the country. Young men were being trained to kill themselves in attacks and to fight for their religion. Mariam said, "Why is he taking so long?" Rasheed spat on the ground and kicked dirt over it. An hour later, they were inside. Mariam and Rasheed were following the doorman. Their shoes made noise on the floor as they were led across the cool main room. Mariam saw two men sitting on leather chairs. There were guns and a small table between them. They were drinking black tea and eating sweet, round cakes covered in sugar. She thought of Aziza, who loved these cakes, and quickly looked away. The doorman led them outside to a high area with a wall. From his pocket, he took out a small black phone without a wire and a piece of paper with a number written on it. He told Rasheed it was his boss's special phone. "I got you five minutes," he said. "No more." "Thank you," Rasheed said. "I will not forget this." The doorman nodded and walked away. Rasheed dialled the number. He gave Mariam the phone. As Mariam listened to the rough sound of the phone ringing, her mind thought about other things. It thought about the last time she had seen Jalil. It was thirteen years before, in the spring of 1987. He had stood on the street outside her house. He was leaning on a stick he used for walking. Next to him was the blue car with licence plates from Herat. It had a white line going across the top, front, and back. He had stood there for hours, waiting for her. Sometimes he called her name, just as she had once called his name outside his house many years ago. Mariam had opened the cloth covering the window a little bit once. She saw him for a moment. Only a quick look, but long enough to see that his hair had become soft and white. He had started to bend forward when he stood. He wore glasses, a red tie, as always, and the usual white cloth folded like a triangle in his suit pocket. Jalil had seen her too, for just a moment. Their eyes had met quickly through a gap in the window covering, just as they had met many years earlier through a gap in different window coverings. But then Mariam had quickly closed the window covering. She had sat on the bed and waited for him to leave. Now she thought about the letter Jalil had finally left at her door. She had kept it for days, under her pillow. Sometimes she picked it up and turned it over in her hands. In the end, she had torn it into small pieces without opening it. And now here she was, after all these years, calling him. Mariam was sorry now for her foolish pride when she was young. She wished now that she had let him in. What bad thing would have happened if she had let him in? If she had sat with him and let him say what he had come to say? He was her father. It was true he had not been a good father. But how ordinary his mistakes seemed now, how easy to forgive, when she thought about how bad Rasheed was, or about the cruel and violent things she had seen men do to each other. She wished she had not destroyed his letter. A man's deep voice spoke in her ear. He told her she had called the main office of the city leader in Herat. Mariam cleared her throat. "Hello, brother, I am looking for someone who lives in Herat. Or he lived there many years ago. His name is Jalil Khan. He lived in a certain area and owned the cinema. Do you know anything about where he is?" The man sounded annoyed. "This is why you call the city leader's office?" Mariam said she didn't know who else to call. "Please forgive me, brother. I know you have important things to do, but this is a question of life and death. I am calling about a question of life and death." "I don't know him. The cinema has been closed for many years." "Maybe there's someone there who might know him, someone—" "There is no one." Mariam closed her eyes. "Please, brother. There are children involved. Small children." A long sound of air coming out. "Maybe someone there—" "There's a man who takes care of the outside area here. I think he has lived here all his life." "Yes, ask him, please." "Call back tomorrow." Mariam said she could not. "I have this phone for only five minutes. I don't—" There was a click sound on the other end. Mariam thought he had hung up. But she could hear steps, and voices. A car horn far away, and a sound like a machine with clicks. Maybe an electric fan. She moved the phone to her other ear. She closed her eyes. She imagined Jalil smiling, reaching into his pocket. Ah. Of course. Well. Here then. Without waiting any longer... A piece of metal shaped like a leaf. Small round pieces of metal with pictures of moons and stars hanging from it. Try it on, Mariam. What do you think? I think you look like a queen. A few minutes passed. Then steps, a sound like wood moving, and a click. "He does know him." "He does?" "That's what he says." "Where is he?" Mariam said. "Does this man know where Jalil Khan is?" There was a pause. "He says he died years ago, back in 1987." Mariam felt sick in her stomach. She had thought this might be possible, of course. Jalil would have been in his middle or late seventies by now. But... 1987. He was dying then. He had driven all the way from Herat to say goodbye. She moved to the edge of the balcony. From up here, she could see the hotel's swimming pool that was once famous. It was empty and dirty now. It had marks from bullets and broken tiles. And there was the tennis court that was damaged. The torn net lay loosely in the middle of it, like old skin left by a snake. "I have to go now," the voice on the other end said. "I am sorry I bothered you," Mariam said, crying quietly into the phone. She saw Jalil waving to her. She saw him jumping from stone to stone as he crossed the small river. His pockets were full of gifts. All the times she had waited nervously for him, asking God to give her more time with him. "Thank you," Mariam started to say, but the man on the other end had already ended the call. Rasheed was looking at her. Mariam shook her head. "Useless," he said. He took the phone from her quickly. "Like daughter, like father." On their way out of the main room, Rasheed walked quickly to the small table. No one was there now. He put the last round cake in his pocket. He took it home and gave it to Zalmai. 42. Laila In a paper bag, Aziza put these things: her shirt with flowers and her one pair of socks. Her wool gloves that did not match. An old orange blanket with stars and pictures of comets. A broken plastic cup. A banana. Her set of small squares with dots used for games. It was a cool morning in April 2001, just before Laila's twenty-third birthday. The sky was a light gray colour. Strong, cold wind kept shaking the door with a screen. This was a few days after Laila heard that a leader called Ahmad Shah Massoud had gone to France and spoken to the European government leaders. Massoud was now in his home area in the North of Afghanistan. He was leading the only group still fighting the Taliban. In Europe, Massoud had told the Western countries about places where terrorists were training in Afghanistan. He asked the United States to help him fight the Taliban. He had said, "If President Bush does not help us, these terrorists will hurt the U.S. and Europe very soon." A month before that, Laila had learned that the Taliban had put bombs in the large statues of Buddha in a place called Bamiyan. They had blown them up. They said the statues were objects people worshipped and were a sin. People all over the world were angry, from the U.S. to China. Governments, people who study history, and people who study old things from the past all over the world had written letters. They had asked the Taliban not to destroy the two most important historical objects in Afghanistan. But the Taliban had gone ahead and made their bombs explode inside the statues that were two thousand years old. They had shouted a religious phrase with each explosion. They cheered each time the statues lost an arm or a leg in a cloud of dust. Laila remembered standing on top of the bigger of the two statues with Babi and Tariq. This was back in 1987. A gentle wind was blowing on their faces in the sunlight. They watched a bird flying in circles over the wide valley below. But when she heard the news that the statues were destroyed, Laila felt nothing. It did not seem important. How could she care about statues when her own life was falling apart like dust? Until Rasheed told her it was time to go, Laila sat on the floor in a corner of the living room. She was not speaking and her face showed no feeling. Her hair hung around her face in messy curls. No matter how much she breathed in and out, Laila felt like she could not fill her lungs with enough air. ON THE WAY to the area called Karteh-Seh, Zalmai moved up and down in Rasheed's arms. Aziza held Mariam's hand and walked quickly beside her. The wind blew the dirty cloth tied under Aziza's chin. It made waves in the bottom of her dress. Aziza looked more serious now. It was as if she was starting to feel, with each step, that she was being tricked. Laila had not found the strength to tell Aziza the truth. She had told her that she was going to a school, a special school where the children ate and slept and did not come home after lessons. Now Aziza kept asking Laila the same questions she had been asking for days. Did the students sleep in different rooms or all in one very big room? Would she make friends? Was she, Laila, sure that the teachers would be nice? And, more than once, How long do I have to stay? They stopped two blocks away from the low building that looked like military housing. "Zalmai and I will wait here," Rasheed said. "Oh, before I forget..." He took a stick of chewing gum from his pocket. It was a gift for saying goodbye. He held it out to Aziza in a stiff, generous way. Aziza took it and said thank you quietly. Laila was amazed by Aziza's calm and polite way. She was amazed by Aziza's great ability to forgive. Laila's eyes filled with tears. Her heart felt tight, and she felt weak with sadness. She thought that this afternoon Aziza would not sleep next to her. She would not feel the light weight of Aziza's arm on her chest. She would not feel the curve of Aziza's head pushing into her side. She would not feel Aziza's breath warming her neck. She would not feel Aziza's feet poking her stomach. When Aziza was led away, Zalmai started crying loudly. He cried, "Ziza! Ziza!" He moved and kicked in his father's arms. He called for his sister. But then his attention was taken by a monkey with a music box across the street. They walked the last two blocks alone, Mariam, Laila, and Aziza. As they got closer to the building, Laila could see its broken front. The roof was bending down. Pieces of wood were nailed across the spaces where windows were missing. The top of a swing set was visible over a broken wall. They stopped by the door, and Laila repeated to Aziza what she had told her earlier. "And if they ask about your father, what do you say?" "The Mujahideen killed him," Aziza said. Her mouth looked careful and unsure. "That's good. Aziza, do you understand?" "Because this is a special school," Aziza said. Now that they were here, and the building was real, she looked shaken. Her bottom lip was shaking, and her eyes looked like they might cry. Laila saw how hard she was trying to be brave. "If we tell the truth," Aziza said in a thin voice, like she could not breathe well, "they won't take me. It's a special school. I want to go home." "I will visit all the time," Laila managed to say. "I promise." "Me too," said Mariam. "We'll come to see you, Aziza, and we'll play together, just like always. It's only for a little while, until your father finds work." "They have food here," Laila said, her voice shaking. She was happy she was wearing the full body covering. She was happy that Aziza could not see how much she was hurting inside. "Here, you won't be hungry. They have rice and bread and water, and maybe even fruit." "But you won't be here. And Auntie Mariam won't be with me." "I'll come and see you," Laila said. "All the time. Look at me, Aziza. I'll come and see you. I'm your mother. Even if it is very difficult, I will come and see you." THE MAN WHO ran the orphanage was a man who bent forward when he walked. He was thin in the chest. His face had pleasant lines. He was losing his hair on top. He had a long beard. His eyes were small and round like peas. His name was Zaman. He wore a small round hat. The glass in the left side of his glasses was broken. As he led them to his office, he asked Laila and Mariam their names. He asked for Aziza's name too, and how old she was. They walked through dark hallways. Children without shoes stepped aside and watched. Their hair was messy or cut very short. They wore sweaters with damaged ends, torn trousers with holes in the knees, coats fixed with strong tape. Laila smelled soap and baby powder. She smelled something like cleaning liquid and pee. She also smelled Aziza's growing fear. Aziza had started to cry quietly. Laila saw the yard for a moment. It was a place with many unwanted plants, a shaky swing set, old round pieces of rubber, and a basketball that had no air. The rooms they passed were empty. The windows were covered with plastic sheets. A boy quickly came out of one room and grabbed Laila's arm. He tried to climb into her arms. A helper, who was cleaning up what looked like a wet area of pee, put down his cleaning tool and gently pulled the boy off. Zaman seemed kind and caring towards the children in the orphanage. He gently touched the heads of some as he walked past. He said a friendly word or two to them. He gently messed up their hair. He did not act like he was better than them. The children were happy when he touched them. Laila thought they all looked at him hoping he would approve of them. He showed them into his office. It was a room with only three chairs that could be folded. There was a messy desk with piles of paper on it. "You are from Herat," Zaman said to Mariam. "I can tell from the way you speak." He leaned back in his chair and put his hands together over his stomach. He said he had a brother-in-law who used to live there. Even in these simple actions, Laila noticed that his movements seemed difficult. And although he was smiling a little, Laila felt that he was sad and hurt inside. It was like disappointment and failure were covered with a friendly appearance. "He made glass," Zaman said. "He made these beautiful swans that were green like a precious stone. You held them up to the sunlight and they shone inside, like the glass was full of tiny jewels. Have you been back?" Mariam said she had not. "I am from Kandahar myself. Have you ever been to Kandahar, sister? No? It is lovely. What gardens! And the grapes! Oh, the grapes. They taste so good." A few children had gathered by the door and were looking in secretly. Zaman gently told them to go away, speaking in the local language. "Of course I love Herat too. It is the city of artists and writers, religious teachers and wise people. You know the old joke, that you cannot stretch out your leg in Herat without poking a poet in the back." Next to Laila, Aziza made a small sound like laughing through her nose. Zaman pretended to be surprised. "Ah, there. I have made you laugh, little sister. That is usually the difficult part. I was worried, there, for a while. I thought I would have to make chicken sounds or donkey sounds. But, there you are. And you are so lovely." He called in a helper to watch Aziza for a few minutes. Aziza quickly jumped onto Mariam's lap and held onto her tightly. "We are just going to talk, my love," Laila said. "I will be right here. Okay? Right here." "Why don't we go outside for a minute, Aziza?" Mariam said. "Your mother needs to talk to Uncle Zaman here. Just for a minute. Now, come on." When they were alone, Zaman asked for Aziza's date of birth, if she had been sick, and if she had problems with certain foods or things. He asked about Aziza's father. Laila had the strange feeling of telling a lie that was also the truth. Zaman listened. His face did not show if he believed her or not. He said he ran the orphanage based on trust. If a sister said her husband was dead and she could not take care of her children, he did not ask questions. Laila started to cry. Zaman put down his pen. "I am ashamed," Laila said, her voice rough, her hand covering her mouth. "Look at me, sister." "What kind of mother leaves her own child?" "Look at me." Laila looked up. "It is not your fault. Do you hear me? Not you. It is those cruel, wild men who are to blame. They bring shame on me as a person from my tribe. They have brought shame to the name of my people. And you are not alone, sister. We get mothers like you all the time—all the time—mothers who come here who cannot feed their children because the Taliban will not let them go out and earn money. So you do not blame yourself. No one here blames you. I understand." He leaned forward. "Sister. I understand." Laila wiped her eyes with her cloth covering. "As for this place," Zaman sighed, moving his hand, "you can see that it is in a very bad condition. We never have enough money. We are always trying to find ways to manage. We get little or no help from the Taliban. But we manage. Like you, we do what we must do. God is good and kind, and God provides. And as long as He provides, I will make sure that Aziza has food and clothes. That much I promise you." Laila nodded. "All right?" He was smiling in a friendly way. "But do not cry, sister. Do not let her see you cry." Laila wiped her eyes again. "God bless you," she said, her voice thick. "God bless you, brother." BUT WHEN IT was time to say goodbye, the scene happened exactly as Laila had feared. Aziza panicked. All the way home, leaning on Mariam, Laila heard Aziza's loud cries in her mind. In her head, she saw Zaman's thick, rough hands close around Aziza's arms. She saw them pull, gently at first, then harder, then strongly to get Aziza away from her. She saw Aziza kicking in Zaman's arms as he quickly turned the corner. She heard Aziza screaming as if she was about to disappear from the world. And Laila saw herself running down the hallway, looking down, a loud cry coming from her throat. "I smell her," she told Mariam at home. Her eyes looked past Mariam's shoulder without seeing, past the yard, the walls, to the mountains, which were brown like spit from a smoker. "I smell her sleep smell. Do you? Do you smell it?" "Oh, Laila," said Mariam. "Don't. What good is this? What good?" AT FIRST, Rasheed went with Laila, Mariam, and Zalmai to the orphanage to make Laila happy. But as they walked, he made sure she saw his unhappy face. He made sure she heard him complaining about how difficult she was making things for him. He complained about how much his legs, back, and feet hurt from walking to and from the orphanage. He made sure she knew how much trouble she was causing him. "I am not a young man anymore," he said. "Not that you care. You would make me work until I was completely tired, if you could. But you cannot, Laila. You cannot have things your way." They separated two blocks from the orphanage. He never stayed longer than fifteen minutes. "One minute late," he said, "and I start walking back. I mean it." Laila had to ask him many times, beg him, to stay a little longer with Aziza. She did this for herself, and for Mariam, who was very sad because Aziza was not there. But, as always, Mariam chose to deal with her sadness privately and quietly. And Laila did it for Zalmai too. He asked for his sister every day and became very angry. Sometimes his anger turned into crying fits that could not be stopped. Sometimes, on the way to the orphanage, Rasheed stopped and complained that his leg hurt. Then he turned around and started walking home with long, steady steps, without any sign of pain. Or he made a sound with his tongue and said, "It is my lungs, Laila. I cannot breathe well. Maybe tomorrow I will feel better, or the day after. We will see." He never tried to act like he was having trouble breathing. Often, as he turned back and walked quickly home, he lit a cigarette. Laila had to follow him home. She felt helpless and very angry. Then one day he told Laila he would not take her anymore. "I am too tired from walking in the streets all day," he said, "looking for work." "Then I will go by myself," Laila said. "You cannot stop me, Rasheed. Do you hear me? You can hit me as much as you want, but I will keep going there." "Do as you wish. But you will not get past the Taliban. Do not say I did not warn you." "I am coming with you," Mariam said. Laila would not let her. "You have to stay home with Zalmai. If we get stopped... I do not want him to see." And so Laila's life suddenly became about finding ways to see Aziza. Half the time, she never reached the orphanage. When she crossed the street, the Taliban saw her. They asked her many questions—What is your name? Where are you going? Why are you alone? Where is your male relative?—before they sent her home. If she was lucky, they just shouted at her or kicked her once in the back, or pushed her. Other times, they hit her with different things: wooden sticks, fresh tree branches, short whips. They slapped her, often hit her with their fists. One day, a young Taliban man beat Laila with a radio antenna. When he finished, he hit the back of her neck one last time. He said, "If I see you again, I will beat you until your mother's milk comes out of your bones." That time, Laila went home. She lay on her stomach. She felt like a stupid, sad animal. She made a quiet sound of pain as Mariam put wet cloths on her back and legs, which were bleeding. But, usually, Laila refused to give up. She acted like she was going home, then took a different way through smaller streets. Sometimes she was caught, questioned, and shouted at—two, three, even four times in one day. Then the whips came down and the antennas moved quickly through the air. She walked slowly home, bleeding, without even seeing Aziza for a moment. Soon Laila started wearing extra layers of clothes, even when it was hot. She wore two or three sweaters under her full body covering to protect herself from the beatings. But for Laila, the reward, if she got past the Taliban, was worth it. She could spend as much time as she wanted then—hours, even—with Aziza. They sat in the open area, near the swing set, among other children and mothers who were visiting. They talked about what Aziza had learned that week. Aziza said Uncle Zaman made sure to teach them something every day. Most days they learned reading and writing. Sometimes they learned about countries and maps. A little history or science, something about plants, animals. "But we have to close the curtains," Aziza said, "so the Taliban do not see us." Aziza said Uncle Zaman had tools for knitting and balls of wool ready. This was in case the Taliban came to check the place. "We put the books away and pretend to knit." One day, while visiting Aziza, Laila saw a woman who was not young. Her full body covering was pushed back. She was visiting with three boys and a girl. Laila recognized the sharp face, the thick eyebrows. But she did not recognize the mouth that seemed to have sunk in or the gray hair. This was the doctor.Laila remembered the teacher. She wore black clothes and shawls. Her voice was sharp. Her black hair was in a bun, and you could see short hairs on her neck. Laila remembered the teacher said women should not cover their faces because women and men are the same. One time, the teacher looked at Laila, but she didn't show she knew her.

Aziza was talking about the earth. She said, "They are cracks in the earth's skin. They are called faults." It was a warm Friday in June 2001. Laila, Zalmai, Mariam, and Aziza were in the yard of the orphanage. Rasheed was waiting for them near the bus stop. Children were running and playing outside.

Aziza said, "On both sides of the faults, there are pieces of rock. These make the earth's skin." Someone had tied Aziza's hair back nicely. Laila wished she had done it. Aziza moved her hands to show how rocks move. Zalmai watched. Aziza said, "Are they called Kectonic plates?" Laila said, "Tectonic." Laila's mouth hurt. Her back and neck were sore. Her lip was big, and her tongue felt where Rasheed had hit out a tooth two days before. Laila thought she could not live with so many hard beatings.

Mariam said, "You are very smart." Aziza was happy. Aziza said, "You are not silly, Aunt Mariam." She said the man at the orphanage, Kaka Zaman, said sometimes rocks move very deep down. It is strong and scary there, but on the earth's top, we only feel a small shake. The time before this visit, Aziza talked about why the sky is blue. She said without air, the sky would be black and the sun like a bright star.

Zalmai asked, "Is Aziza coming home with us today?" Laila said, "Soon." Laila watched him walk away. He walked like his father, bent forward a little. He sat on the ground and pulled plants. Aziza had told her about how water goes up trees.

Laila often thought what the Taliban would do if they knew Kaka Zaman taught the children.

When Aziza visited, she talked a lot. She talked quickly and moved her hands a lot. She seemed nervous. She had a new laugh, it was like a nervous sound. Laila saw dirt under Aziza's nails. Aziza saw Laila look and hid her hands. If a child cried or looked dirty, Aziza quickly said why, like she was sorry her home was not good. She said she was fine. She said kids were nice to her. She said she was eating and sleeping well. She said they had lamb, but maybe it was last week.

Aziza now spoke with a small stop before some words, especially words starting with 't'. Mariam saw it first. Laila asked Zaman, but he did not notice.

They left the orphanage with Aziza for a short trip. They met Rasheed. Zalmai was very happy to see his father. Aziza was quiet but not unfriendly. Rasheed said they must hurry because he had to go back to work soon. He had a new job opening doors at a hotel. He worked six days a week. Sometimes, the cook gave him food to take home. It was old food. Rasheed said when he saved money, Aziza could come home. Rasheed wore a red uniform. He looked different in it, maybe a little sad or weak.

They went on a bus to a place called Titanic City. They walked into the dry river area where there were many small shops. Near a bridge, they saw a dead man hanging. His ears were cut off. In the market, there were many people: buyers, people changing money, people from aid groups, sellers, women asking for money. Taliban men walked around watching people.

Zalmai chose a rubber ball. Rasheed told Aziza to choose something. Aziza felt shy. Rasheed said, "Quickly, I have to work." Aziza chose a toy that gives candy. Rasheed was angry about the price. He argued. Then he told Aziza, "Give it back. I cannot buy two."

On the way back, Aziza became sadder as they got near the orphanage. Her nervous talking and hand movements stopped. Laila and Mariam started talking a lot to make noise and fill the sad quiet. After Rasheed left, Laila watched Aziza go back into the orphanage yard. She thought about Aziza's stutter and what she said about deep shakes in the earth.

Later, Zalmai shouted, "Go away!" Mariam asked who. He pointed to a man at their front door. The man walked to them. Laila was very shocked. She felt weak. She thought he was not real. She stood very still. Then she took a breath. He was still there. She took a step, then another. Then she ran to him.

Upstairs, Zalmai was full of energy with his new ball. Mariam asked him to stop, but he did not listen because he knew she could not make him. They played with a toy car. Earlier, when they met Tariq, Zalmai held his ball tight and put his thumb in his mouth. He looked at Tariq with doubt. He said, "Who is that man? I do not like him." Now, Zalmai wanted his ball again. He cried loudly that it was lost and the one Mariam found was not his real ball. Laila came up to calm him. Mariam waited outside the room. She saw Tariq's legs downstairs. Then she understood. The doorman she saw at the hotel when she called Jalil was Tariq. She thought about the lie that Tariq was dead. She wondered if Rasheed paid someone to tell Laila that story.

Tariq talked about being in prison. He said a man in prison painted pictures of birds called flamingos. The Taliban did not like the birds' legs. They hit the man and told him to paint trousers on the birds. The man painted them with colours that wash off. Laila felt bad about her teeth and lip. She wished she looked better. Tariq smiled. He also had a missing tooth. He wore a hat, boots, and khaki trousers. He looked older, tired. His face was brown from the sun. He was starting to lose his hair. His eyes were not as bright. Laila thought about Tariq's mother and father. She asked about them. Tariq said they had died. Laila was sad. Tariq gave her a gift, cheese from his goat, Alyona. Laila thought Alyona was his wife, but Tariq said it was his goat. Laila remembered the name from a film they watched long ago. Tariq said he lives in the hills in Pakistan, in a town called Murree. He built a fence for his goat because of wolves. He said Murree is a nice, simple place. He likes living there. He heard about Laila's parents from people nearby. He said he did not know anyone in Kabul anymore. Laila said she did not know Kabul either, even though she lived there.

Later, after Tariq left, Zalmai told Rasheed, "Mother has a new friend. A man." Rasheed looked up and was angry.

Tariq asked to smoke. He said he was in a refugee camp in Pakistan for a year with his parents. He said it was a bad place, full of tents, dust, and open sewers. Many children died there. His father died in the first winter. His mother was very sick, but a doctor helped her. One winter, Tariq took a blanket from a young boy for his mother. He decided they must leave the camp. He tried to find work, but his leg made it hard. One day, a man asked him to take a coat to another city for money. Tariq knew it was bad, but he needed the money for winter. He was caught by the police before he got on the bus. The police cut the coat, and drugs fell out. Tariq laughed nervously when he told this story.

Rasheed was angry. Zalmai said the man had a bad leg. Rasheed asked if it was Tariq. Mariam said he just visited. Rasheed told Mariam to be quiet. He was angry at Laila. He called her names. He said she let Tariq in his house with his son. Laila said Rasheed lied to her, that he paid a man to say Tariq was dead. She said he knew she would leave if she knew Tariq was alive. Rasheed shouted and asked if she lied about Aziza, calling her a bad name.

Laila felt sick when Tariq stopped talking. She looked away. Tariq did not say much about prison. He only said he learned a new language. Laila thought it was a terrible place. Tariq said his mother tried to visit him but could not. He wrote letters to her. He said he wrote many letters to Laila. Upstairs, Zalmai started crying.

Rasheed said it was like old times for Laila and Tariq. He asked Zalmai if Laila showed her face to Tariq. Zalmai said yes. Rasheed said, "I see. You worked together."

Tariq said Zalmai did not like him. Laila said not to worry about Zalmai. She changed the topic. Tariq said he had been in Murree for less than a year. In prison, he met a man called Salim. Salim helped him find out his mother had died. Tariq was in prison for seven years. He said he was lucky the time was not longer. When he left prison, Salim gave him the address of his brother, Sayeed, who had a small hotel in Murree. Tariq liked Murree. Sayeed gave him a job cleaning and fixing things. Sayeed watched him work first. Then Sayeed gave him full pay, food, a coat, and a new leg. Tariq was very thankful. With his first full money, he bought Alyona, his white goat.

Laila said she thought he was dead. Tariq said he knew. Laila's voice was sad. She said she believed the man who said he was dead. She felt alone and scared, so she married Rasheed. Tariq said she did not need to say this. Laila said she did, because there was a bigger reason she married Rasheed. She said there was someone he did not know about. She had to tell him.

Rasheed asked Zalmai again if he talked to Tariq. Zalmai looked scared. Rasheed told him to tell the truth. Zalmai quietly said his mother was downstairs talking to the man. Rasheed said, "So, you worked together."

When Tariq left, he said he wanted to meet Aziza. Laila said she would make it happen. Tariq said Aziza was a nice name. Laila thought about the last ten years. She thought about meeting Tariq in secret before. She wondered if he still thought she was pretty or if she looked old and sad. For a short time, it felt like the hard years had not happened. Her parents dying, marrying Rasheed, the fighting, the Taliban, the beatings, the hunger, her children - it felt like a strange dream between their last meeting and now. Then Tariq looked serious. He touched her lip where Rasheed hit her. He said, "He did this to you." Laila remembered the time they were together and Aziza was made. Tariq almost whispered, "I wish I took you with me." Laila had to look down and stop crying. Tariq said he knew she was married with children. He knew it was not right to come back now. But he came a long way to see her. He said, "Oh, Laila, I wish I never left you." Laila said, "Stop. It hurts." He said he should have tried harder to marry her before. Everything would be different. Laila said, "Do not talk like this. Please. It hurts." He nodded. He started to walk towards her but stopped. He said he did not want to make her life difficult. He said if she wanted him to leave, he would go back to Pakistan and never bother her again. Laila said "No!" loudly. She grabbed his arm, then let go. She said, "No. Do not leave, Tariq. Please stay." Tariq nodded. Laila said Rasheed works from noon to eight. She said, "Come back tomorrow afternoon. I will take you to Aziza." Tariq said he was not afraid of Rasheed. Laila said she knew. Tariq asked, "And then?" Laila said she did not know. She had to think. She said it was difficult. Tariq said he knew and understood. He said he was sorry for many things. Laila said, "Do not be sorry. You promised you would come back. And you did." Tariq's eyes had water. He said, "It is good to see you, Laila." She watched him walk away. She felt cold. She thought about the many letters he wrote and felt sad but also hopeful.

Upstairs, Zalmai said, "I was upstairs, playing with Mariam." Rasheed asked about Laila. Zalmai, looking scared, whispered, "She was downstairs, talking to that man." Rasheed said, "I see. You worked together." Mariam watched Rasheed's face. He looked thoughtful for a moment. Then he looked up. Mariam started to speak, but he stopped her. He said to Mariam, "It is too late." He told Zalmai to go upstairs. Zalmai looked scared. Rasheed said loudly, "Now!" He took Zalmai upstairs. Mariam and Laila stood still, looking down. They heard Rasheed go upstairs, heard Zalmai cry, heard a door lock. Then Rasheed came back down quickly. Mariam saw his belt wrapped around his hand. He pushed Mariam away. He hit Laila with the belt. Laila was surprised. She touched her head and saw blood. Her surprise changed to hate. Rasheed hit her again. Laila put her arm up and tried to grab the belt. Rasheed hit her again. Laila ran away. Mariam screamed and asked Rasheed to stop. He chased Laila. Laila hit his ear. He became more angry. He caught her and hit her many times with the belt. It cut her body. Mariam started scratching Rasheed's face. He stopped hitting Laila and turned to Mariam. He looked at her, surprised, then disappointed. Mariam remembered seeing his eyes years ago and knew she had been foolish. She thought about all the years she tried to be a good wife and how mean he was to her. Did she deserve this? Rasheed dropped the belt to hit her with his hands. But Laila picked up a glass and hit Rasheed's face. The glass broke. There was blood on Laila and on Rasheed's face. He turned to Laila, very angry. They fell to the floor, fighting. Rasheed was on top of Laila, holding her neck with his hands. He was trying to kill her. Laila's face turned blue. She stopped fighting. Mariam tried to pull his hands away, biting him, but she could not. She saw he was going to kill Laila. Mariam went out of the room. She heard Zalmai crying upstairs behind the locked door. She ran outside to the small room for tools. She took the shovel. She came back into the room. Rasheed was still trying to kill Laila. Laila was almost dead. Mariam thought, "He is going to kill her." She knew she must stop him. He took so much from her. He would not take Laila too. Mariam stood strong and held the shovel tight. She lifted it. She said his name loudly, "Rasheed." He looked up. Mariam hit him on the side of the head with the shovel. The hit made him fall off Laila. Rasheed touched his head. He saw the blood and looked at Mariam. Mariam thought maybe he understood now. Maybe he saw how hard she had lived with him. But he smiled a cruel smile. Mariam knew she had to finish. If he lived, he would get his gun and maybe kill Laila and her. If she was sure he would only kill her and not Laila, maybe she would stop.But Mariam saw hate in Rasheed’s eyes for both of them. So Mariam lifted the shovel high, as high as she could, bending her back. She turned it so the sharp side was pointing down. As she did this, she thought that this was the first time she was choosing what happened in her life. Then, Mariam brought the shovel down. This time, she hit him as hard as she could. <br><br>46. Laila<br>Laila felt the face above her, full of teeth, tobacco smell, and scary eyes. She also felt Mariam, nearby, hitting Rasheed many times with her fists. Above them was the ceiling. Laila looked at the ceiling. There were dark mold marks on it like ink on a dress. There was a crack in the plaster. It looked like a smile or a sad face, depending on where you stood. Laila remembered all the times she had used a cloth on a broom to clean the cobwebs from this ceiling. She remembered the three times she and Mariam had painted it white. The crack didn’t look like a smile now. It looked like it was making fun of her. And it was moving away. The ceiling was getting smaller, going up and away from her towards a blurry, dark place. It went up until it was as small as a postage stamp, white and bright. Everything else around it was dark. In the dark, Rasheed’s face was like a bright spot. Then she saw quick flashes of bright light in front of her eyes, like silver stars exploding. Strange shapes appeared in the light, moving up and down, sideways, joining together, breaking apart, changing shape, then disappearing into darkness. Voices sounded far away and unclear.<br><br>Behind her closed eyes, she saw her children’s faces appear and disappear. Aziza, awake and looking worried, knowing secrets. Zalmai, looking up at his father with great hope. Laila thought, this is how it will end. What a sad end.<br><br>But then the darkness started to go away. She felt like she was going up, being lifted. The ceiling slowly came back, got bigger. Now Laila could see the crack again. It looked like the same old simple smile. Someone was shaking her. ‘Are you okay? Answer me, are you okay?’ Mariam’s face, with scratches on it, looked very worried, close to Laila’s face. Laila tried to breathe. It hurt her throat. She tried again. It hurt even more this time, not just her throat but her chest too. Then she started coughing and making sounds when she breathed. She was having trouble breathing. But she was breathing. Her good ear was ringing.<br><br>THE FIRST THING Laila saw when she sat up was Rasheed. He was lying on his back. He was looking at nothing. His mouth was open like a fish’s. A little pink foam had come out of his mouth and gone down his cheek. The front of his trousers was wet. She saw his forehead. Then she saw the shovel.<br><br>A sad sound came from her. ‘Oh,’ she said, her voice shaking, almost silent, ‘Oh, Mariam.’<br><br>LAILA WALKED BACK and forth, making sad sounds and hitting her hands together. Mariam sat near Rasheed. Her hands were in her lap. She was calm and still. Mariam didn’t say anything for a long time. Laila’s mouth was dry. She was speaking with difficulty, shaking all over. She tried not to look at Rasheed, at his open mouth and eyes, at the blood getting thick near his neck bone. Outside, the light was getting darker. The shadows were getting longer. Mariam’s face looked thin and tired in this light. But she didn’t look upset or scared. She just looked thoughtful, thinking deeply. She was so calm that when a fly landed on her chin, she didn’t notice it. She just sat there with her bottom lip pushed out, like she did when she was thinking hard. Finally, she said, ‘Sit down, Laila jo.’<br><br>Laila sat down. She did as she was told.<br><br>‘We have to move him. Zalmai must not see this.’<br><br>MARIAM TOOK the bedroom key from Rasheed’s pocket before they wrapped him in a bedsheet. Laila held his legs, behind the knees. Mariam held him under his arms. They tried to lift him, but he was too heavy. They ended up pulling him along the floor. As they went through the front door and into the yard, Rasheed’s foot hit the door frame and his leg bent strangely. They had to pull him back and try again. Then something made a noise upstairs. Laila’s legs felt weak. She dropped Rasheed. She fell to the ground, crying and shaking. Mariam had to stand over her, with her hands on her hips, and tell her to stop crying. She said what was done was done. After some time, Laila got up and wiped her face. They carried Rasheed to the yard without more problems. They took him into the toolshed. They left him behind the workbench. On the bench were his saw, some nails, a tool for cutting wood, a hammer, and a round piece of wood. Rasheed had planned to make something from the wood for Zalmai but never did. Then they went back inside. Mariam washed her hands, put her hands through her hair, took a deep breath and let it out. ‘Let me take care of your injuries now. You are full of cuts, Laila jo.’<br><br>MARIAM SAID she needed the night to think. To get her ideas clear and make a plan.<br><br>‘There is a way,’ she said, ‘and I just need to find it.’<br><br>‘We must leave! We can’t stay here,’ Laila said in a weak, rough voice. She suddenly thought of the sound the shovel made when it hit Rasheed’s head. She leaned forward quickly. She felt sick. Mariam waited patiently until Laila felt better. Then she told Laila to lie down. As she stroked Laila’s hair in her lap, Mariam said not to worry, that everything would be okay. She said they would leave—she, Laila, the children, and Tariq too. They would leave this house, and this difficult city. They would leave this sad country completely, Mariam said, running her hands through Laila’s hair. They would go someplace far away and safe where no one would find them, where they could forget their past and be safe. ‘Somewhere with trees,’ she said. ‘Yes. Many trees.’<br><br>They would live in a small house near a town they had never heard of, Mariam said. Or in a small village where the road was narrow and not paved, but with many plants and bushes along it. Maybe there would be a path to walk on that went to a field where the children could play. Or maybe a stone road that would take them to a clear blue lake where fish swam and plants grew from the water. They would have sheep and chickens. They would make bread together and teach the children to read. They would make new lives for themselves—quiet, simple lives. There, the heavy feeling of all they had suffered would leave them. They would deserve all the happiness and simple good life they would find. Laila made sounds to show she agreed and felt hopeful. She saw it would be a life with problems, but problems that were okay, problems they could be proud of, keep, value, like a family treasure. Mariam’s soft, motherly voice continued. It made Laila feel a little better. ‘There is a way,’ she had said. In the morning, Mariam would tell her what they needed to do, and they would do it. Maybe by tomorrow at this time, they would be going to this new life, a life full of chances and joy and problems that were okay. Laila was thankful that Mariam was in charge, clear-headed and thinking well, able to plan for both of them. Laila’s own mind was a nervous, confused mess. Mariam got up. ‘You should go to your son now.’ Mariam looked more upset than Laila had ever seen anyone look.<br><br>LAILA FOUND HIM in the dark, curled up on Rasheed’s side of the bed. She got under the covers next to him and pulled the blanket over them. ‘Are you asleep?’<br><br>Without turning to her, he said, ‘Can’t sleep yet. Baba jan hasn’t said the Babaloo prayers with me.’<br><br>‘Maybe I can say them with you tonight.’<br><br>‘You can’t say them like he can.’<br><br>She gently squeezed his small shoulder. She kissed the back of his neck. ‘I can try.’<br><br>‘Where is Baba jan?’<br><br>‘Baba jan has gone away,’ Laila said. Her throat felt tight again.<br><br>And there it was, said for the first time, the big, terrible lie. How many more times would she have to tell this lie? Laila wondered sadly. How many more times would Zalmai have to be tricked? She thought of Zalmai, how happy he was, running to meet Rasheed when he came home. Rasheed would lift him up by his arms and swing him around until Zalmai’s legs went straight out. They would both laugh afterwards when Zalmai walked like he was drunk. She thought of their messy games and loud laughs, their secret looks. Laila felt a wave of shame and sadness for her son.<br><br>‘Where did he go?’<br><br>‘I don’t know, my love.’<br><br>‘When is he coming back? Will Baba jan bring a present when he comes back?’<br><br>She said the prayers with Zalmai. Twenty-one ‘Bismallah-e-rahman-e-rahims’—one for each joint on seven fingers. She watched him cup his hands in front of his face and blow into them. Then he put the back of his hands on his forehead and made a movement to push something away, whispering, ‘Babaloo, go away, do not come to Zalmai, he doesn’t need you. Babaloo, go away.’ Then, to finish, they said ‘Allah-u-akbar’ three times. Much later that night, Laila was surprised by a quiet voice: ‘Did Baba jan leave because of me? Because of what I said, about you and the man downstairs?’<br><br>She leaned over him, wanting to comfort him, wanting to say, ‘It had nothing to do with you, Zalmai. No. Nothing is your fault.’ But he was asleep. His small chest went up and down.<br><br>WHEN LAILA WENT to bed, her mind was unclear, confused, unable to think clearly. But when she woke up, hearing the call for morning prayer, much of the confusion was gone. She sat up and watched Zalmai sleep for a while. His hand was a fist under his chin. Laila imagined Mariam coming into the room quietly in the middle of the night while she and Zalmai slept, watching them, making plans in her head. Laila got out of bed quietly. It was hard to stand. She ached everywhere. Her neck, her shoulders, her back, her arms, her legs, all had cuts from Rasheed’s belt buckle. She winced and quietly left the bedroom. In Mariam’s room, the light was a bit darker than grey. It was the kind of light Laila thought of with roosters crowing and dew on grass. Mariam was sitting in a corner, on a prayer mat facing the window. Slowly, Laila sat down on the floor across from her. ‘You should go and visit Aziza this morning,’ Mariam said.<br><br>‘I know what you are going to do.’<br><br>‘Don’t walk. Take the bus. You will not be noticed. Taxis are too easy to see. You will surely be stopped if you ride alone.’<br><br>‘What you promised last night...’<br><br>Laila could not finish. The trees, the lake, the village without a name. She saw it was a dream. A lovely lie told to make her feel better. Like talking softly to an upset child. ‘I meant it,’ Mariam said. ‘I meant it for you, Laila jo.’ ‘I don’t want any of it without you,’ Laila said in a rough voice. Her eyes were wet with tears.<br><br>Mariam smiled sadly.<br><br>‘I want it to be just like you said, Mariam, all of us going together, you, me, the children. Tariq has a place in Pakistan. We can hide there for a while, wait for things to get calm...’<br><br>‘That is not possible,’ Mariam said patiently, like a parent talking to a child who means well but is wrong.<br><br>‘We will take care of each other,’ Laila said, finding it hard to speak, her eyes full of tears. ‘Like you said. No. I will take care of you for a change.’<br><br>‘Oh, Laila jo.’<br><br>Laila started talking quickly, without stopping. She tried to make a deal. She promised things. She would do all the cleaning, she said, and all the cooking. ‘You won’t have to do anything. Ever again. You rest, sleep late, plant a garden. Whatever you want, you ask and I will get it for you. Don’t do this, Mariam. Don’t leave me. Don’t break Aziza’s heart.’<br><br>‘They cut off hands for stealing bread,’ Mariam said.<br><br>‘What do you think they will do when they find a dead husband and two wives who are gone?’<br><br>‘No one will know,’ Laila whispered. ‘No one will find us.’<br><br>‘They will. Sooner or later. They are like dogs that follow a scent.’<br><br>Mariam’s voice was low, warning. It made Laila’s promises sound like made-up, foolish stories.<br><br>‘Mariam, please...’<br><br>‘When they find you, they will say you are as guilty as me. Tariq too. I will not have you two living like people running from the law. What will happen to your children if you are caught?’ Laila’s eyes were full and stinging with tears.<br><br>‘Who will take care of them then? The Taliban? Think like a mother, Laila jo. Think like a mother. I am.’<br><br>‘I can’t.’<br><br>‘You have to.’<br><br>‘It is not fair,’ Laila said in a rough voice.<br><br>‘But it is. Come here. Come lie here.’ Laila crawled to her and put her head on Mariam’s lap again. She remembered all the afternoons they had spent together, doing each other’s hair. Mariam listened patiently to her everyday thoughts and stories. She looked grateful, like someone who had been given a special and wanted gift. ‘It is fair,’ Mariam said. ‘I have killed our husband. I have taken your son’s father away. It is not right that I run away. I cannot. Even if they never catch us, I will never...’ Her lips shook. ‘I will never escape your son’s sadness. How can I look at him? How can I ever make myself look at him, Laila jo?’ Mariam gently played with a piece of Laila’s hair, straightening a difficult curl.<br><br>‘For me, it ends here. There is nothing more I want. Everything I had ever wished for as a little girl, you have already given me. You and your children have made me very happy. It is okay, Laila jo. This is okay. Don’t be sad.’ Laila could not find a good answer for anything Mariam said. But she kept talking anyway, saying things that didn’t make sense, like a child, about fruit trees to plant and chickens to raise. She talked about small houses in towns without names, and walks to lakes full of fish. In the end, when the words stopped, the tears did not. All Laila could do was give up and cry like a child who understood that an adult was right and she could not argue. All she could do was curl up and put her face one last time in the warm, welcoming comfort of Mariam’s lap.<br><br>LATER THAT MORNING, Mariam packed a small lunch for Zalmai of bread and dried figs. She also packed some figs for Aziza, and a few cookies shaped like animals. She put it all in a paper bag and gave it to Laila. ‘Kiss Aziza for me,’ she said. ‘Tell her she is the light of my eyes and the queen of my heart. Will you do that for me?’ Laila nodded, her lips pressed together.<br><br>‘Take the bus, like I said, and keep your head down.’<br><br>‘When will I see you, Mariam? I want to see you before I speak in court. I will tell them how it happened. I will explain that it was not your fault. That you had to do it. They will understand, won’t they, Mariam? They will understand.’ Mariam looked at her gently.<br><br>She bent down to be at Zalmai’s eye level. He was wearing a red T-shirt, old khaki trousers, and used cowboy boots that Rasheed had bought him from the market. He was holding his new basketball with both hands. Mariam kissed his cheek. ‘You be a good, strong boy now,’ she said. ‘You treat your mother well.’ She held his face in her hands. He tried to pull away, but she held on. ‘I am so sorry, Zalmai jo. Believe me that I am very sorry for all your pain and sadness.’ Laila held Zalmai’s hand as they walked down the road together. Just before they turned the corner, Laila looked back. She saw Mariam at the door. Mariam was wearing a white scarf over her head, a dark blue sweater buttoned in the front, and white cotton trousers. Some grey hair had come loose over her forehead. Lines of sunlight shone across her face and shoulders. Mariam waved in a friendly way. They turned the corner, and Laila never saw Mariam again.<br><br>47. Mariam<br>It seemed she was back in a small, simple house, after all these years. The Walayat women’s prison was a plain, square building in Shar-e-Nau, near Chicken Street. It was in the middle of a larger place that held men prisoners. A locked door separated Mariam and the other women from the men around them. Mariam counted five cells that were used. They were rooms with nothing in them, with dirty walls where the paint was coming off. They had small windows that looked into the courtyard. The windows had bars, even though the cell doors were not locked and the women could go into the courtyard when they wanted. The windows had no glass. There were no curtains either. This meant the Talib guards who walked in the courtyard could easily see inside the cells. Some of the women complained that the guards smoked outside the window and looked in with angry eyes and smiles like wolves. They said the guards whispered dirty jokes to each other about the women. Because of this, most of the women wore burqas all day and only took them off after the sun went down, after the main gate was locked and the guards had gone to their places. At night, the cell Mariam shared with five women and four children was dark. On nights when there was electricity, they lifted Naghma, a short, thin girl with black curly hair, up to the ceiling. There was a wire there with no covering on it. Naghma would wrap the live wire around the bottom of the lightbulb with her hands to make it work. The toilets were like small closets. The cement floor was cracked. There was a small, rectangular hole in the ground. At the bottom of the hole was a pile of human waste. Flies flew in and out of the hole. In the middle of the prison was an open, rectangular courtyard. In the middle of that, there was a well for water. The well had no way to let water out, so the courtyard was often wet and muddy. The water from the well tasted bad. Lines for drying clothes, full of socks and children’s nappies washed by hand, crossed each other in the courtyard. This was where prisoners met visitors. This was where they boiled the rice their families brought them—the prison did not give food. The courtyard was also the children’s playground. Mariam learned that many of the children were born in Walayat and had never seen the world outside these walls. Mariam watched them chase each other. She watched their feet without shoes throw up mud. All day, they ran around, playing fun games. They didn’t notice the bad smell of waste and urine that was everywhere in Walayat and on their own bodies. They didn’t notice the Talib guards until one hit them. Mariam had no visitors. That was the first and only thing she had asked the Talib officials here. No visitors.<br><br>NONE OF THE women in Mariam’s cell were in prison for violent crimes. They were all there for the common reason of ‘running away from home.’ Because of this, Mariam became a bit famous among them, like a special person. The women looked at her with respect, almost in wonder. They offered her their blankets. They tried to share their food with her. The one who wanted to most was Naghma. She always hugged her arms and followed Mariam everywhere. Naghma was the kind of person who found it funny to tell stories about bad things that happened, to others or herself. She said her father had promised her to a tailor who was about thirty years older than her. ‘He smells bad, and has fewer teeth than fingers,’ Naghma said about the tailor. She had tried to run away to Gardez with a young man she loved, the son of a local religious leader. They had only just left Kabul. When they were caught and sent back, the son of the religious leader was beaten. Then he said he was sorry. He said that Naghma had used her female charm to trick him. She had put a spell on him, he said. He promised he would study the holy book (Koran) again. The religious leader’s son was freed. Naghma was sentenced to five years in prison. She said it was okay that she was here in prison. Her father had sworn that the day she was released, he would use a knife on her throat. Listening to Naghma, Mariam remembered the weak light of cold stars and the pink clouds in thin lines over the Safid-koh mountains that morning long ago. Nana had said to her, ‘Like a compass needle that points north, a man’s finger pointing blame always finds a woman. Always. Remember that, Mariam.’<br><br>MARIAM’S TRIAL had happened the week before. There was no lawyer, no public hearing, no questioning of the evidence, no chance to ask for a different decision. Mariam said she did not want witnesses to speak for her. The whole thing lasted less than fifteen minutes. The judge in the middle, a thin-looking Talib, was the leader. He was very thin, with yellow, rough skin and a red, curly beard. He wore glasses that made his eyes look bigger and showed how yellow the white parts were. His neck looked too thin to hold the complicated cloth wrap on his head. ‘You admit this, sister?’ he asked again in a tired voice. ‘I do,’ Mariam said.<br><br>The man nodded. Or maybe he didn’t. It was hard to tell. His hands and head shook a lot. This reminded Mariam of Mullah Faizullah’s shaking. When he drank tea, he did not reach for his cup. He made a sign to the man with broad shoulders on his left. This man respectfully brought the cup to his lips. After, the Talib gently closed his eyes. It was a quiet and polite sign of thanks. Mariam found something about him that made her feel comfortable. When he spoke, it was with a hint of kindness and gentleness. His smile was patient. He did not look at Mariam with hate. He did not speak to her with anger or blame, but with a soft, sorry tone.<br><br>‘Do you completely understand what you are saying?’ the Talib with the thin face on the judge’s right said. This was not the man who gave tea. This one was the youngest of the three. He spoke quickly and with strong, proud confidence. He had been annoyed that Mariam could not speak Pashto. Mariam thought he was the kind of young man who liked having power, who saw wrong things everywhere, and thought it was his right to judge others. ‘I do understand,’ Mariam said.<br><br>‘I wonder,’ the young Talib said. ‘God has made us differently, you women and us men. Our brains are different. You cannot think like we can. Western doctors and their science have shown this. This is why we need only one man witness but two women witnesses.’<br><br>‘I admit what I did, brother,’ Mariam said. ‘But, if I had not, he would have killed her. He was choking her.’<br><br>‘So you say. But, then, women promise all sorts of things all the time.’<br><br>‘It is the truth.’<br><br>‘Do you have witnesses? Other than your co-wife?’<br><br>‘I do not,’ said Mariam.<br><br>‘Well, then.’ He threw up his hands and laughed quietly.<br><br>The sick Talib spoke next.<br><br>‘I have a doctor in Peshawar,’ he said. ‘A good, young Pakistani man. I saw him a month ago, and again last week. I said, tell me the truth, friend. He said to me, three months, Mullah sahib, maybe six at most—it is God’s will, of course.’ He quietly nodded at the man with broad shoulders on his left and took another drink of the tea he was offered. He wiped his mouth with the back of his shaking hand. ‘It does not scare me to leave this life. My only son left it five years ago. This life makes us carry sadness after sadness, long after we can carry no more. No, I believe I will be happy to leave when the time comes. What scares me, sister, is the day God calls me before Him and asks, “Why did you not do as I said, Mullah? Why did you not obey my laws?” How will I explain myself to Him, sister? What will I say to defend myself for not following His commands? All I can do, all any of us can do, in the time we have, is to continue living by the laws He has given us. The clearer I see my end, sister, the closer I am to being judged by God, the more determined I become to carry out His word. However painful it may be.’ He moved on his cushion and winced.<br><br>‘I believe you when you say that your husband was a man with a difficult temper,’ he continued. He looked at Mariam with his glasses. His look was both strict and kind. ‘But I cannot help but be worried by how cruel your action was, sister. I am troubled by what you have done. I am troubled that his little boy was crying for him upstairs when you did it.<br><br>‘I am tired and dying, and I want to be kind. I want to forgive you. But when God calls me and says, “But it was not for you to forgive, Mullah,” what will I say?’ His friends nodded and looked at him with respect.<br><br>‘Something tells me you are not a bad woman, sister. But you have done a bad thing. And you must pay for this thing you have done. Our law is clear on this. It says I must send you where I will soon join you myself.<br><br>‘Do you understand, sister?’ Mariam looked down at her hands. She said she did. ‘May Allah forgive you.’<br><br>Before they led her out, Mariam was given a paper. She was told to sign below her statement and the mullah’s decision. As the three Taliban watched, Mariam wrote her name—the letters M, A, R, I, A, M. She remembered the last time she had signed her name on a paper, twenty-seven years before, at Jalil’s table, with another mullah watching.<br><br>MARIAM SPENT TEN DAYS in prison. She sat by the window of the cell and watched the prison life in the courtyard. When the summer winds blew, she watched small pieces of paper move quickly in the air, going this way and that, high above the prison walls. She watched the winds make the dust angry, turning it into strong swirling shapes that went through the courtyard. Everyone—the guards, the prisoners, the children, Mariam—put their faces into their elbows to protect themselves. But the dust did not stop. It went into ears and noses, into eyelashes and skin folds, into the space between teeth. Only when it got dark did the winds stop. And then if a night breeze blew, it did so gently, as if saying sorry for how strong the wind was in the daytime. On Mariam’s last day at Walayat, Naghma gave her an orange. She put it in Mariam’s hand and closed her fingers around it. Then she started crying. ‘You are the best friend I ever had,’ she said.<br><br>Mariam spent the rest of the day by the window with bars, watching the prisoners below. Someone was cooking, and the smell of spices and warm air came through the window. Mariam could see the children playing a game where someone was blindfolded. Two little girls were singing a song. Mariam remembered it from her childhood. She remembered Jalil singing it to her when they sat on a rock, fishing in the stream:<br><br>Lili lili birdbath,<br>Sitting on a dirt path,<br>Small fish sat on the edge and drank,<br>Slipped, and in the water she sank.<br><br>Mariam had strange dreams that last night. She dreamed of small stones, eleven of them, in a line going up. Jalil, young again, smiling and with dimples, with sweat marks, his coat over his shoulder, finally coming to take his daughter for a ride in his shiny black car. Mullah Faizullah playing with his prayer beads, walking with her along the stream. Their two shadows moved on the water and on the grassy banks. There were blue-purple wild flowers there that, in this dream, smelled like spices. She dreamed of Nana in the door of the small house, her voice quiet and far away, calling her for dinner. Mariam was playing in cool, messy grass where ants walked and small insects moved quickly, and grasshoppers jumped among all the different greens. The sound of a wheelbarrow working hard up a dusty path. Cowbells making noise. Sheep making noise on a hill.<br><br>ON THE WAY to Ghazi Stadium, Mariam bounced in the back of the truck. It slid around holes in the road, and its wheels threw up small stones. The bouncing hurt her tailbone. A young Talib with a gun sat across from her, looking at her. Mariam wondered if he would be the one, this young man who looked kind, with deep bright eyes and a slightly pointed face, with a finger nail painted black tapping the side of the truck. ‘Are you hungry, mother?’ he said.<br><br>Mariam shook her head.<br><br>‘I have a biscuit. It is good. You can have it if you are hungry. I don’t mind.’<br><br>‘No. Thank you, brother.’ He nodded, looking at her kindly. ‘Are you afraid, mother?’<br><br>A lump made it hard for her to speak. In a shaking voice, Mariam told him the truth. ‘Yes. I am very afraid.’<br><br>‘I have a picture of my father,’ he said. ‘I don’t remember him. He fixed bicycles once, I know that much. But I don’t remember how he moved, you know, how he laughed or the sound of his voice.’ He looked away, then back at Mariam. ‘My mother used to say that he was the bravest man she knew. Like a lion, she’d say. But she told me he was crying like a child the morning the communists took him. I am telling you so you know that it is normal to be scared. It is nothing to be ashamed of, mother.’ For the first time that day, Mariam cried a little.<br><br>THOUSANDS OF EYES were looking at her. In the crowded seats, people stretched their necks to see better. People made clicking sounds with their tongues. A quiet noise went through the stadium when someone helped Mariam down from the truck. Mariam imagined heads shaking when the loudspeaker announced her crime. But she did not look up to see if they were shaking because they did not approve or because they felt sorry, because they blamed her or felt pity. Mariam did not look at any of them. Earlier that morning, she had been afraid that she would act foolishly, that she would cry and beg. She had been afraid that she might scream or be sick or even wet herself. She feared that in her last moments, her animal feelings or body problems would betray her. But when she was made to get down from the truck, Mariam’s legs did not give way. Her arms did not wave wildly. She did not have to be pulled. And when she felt herself getting weak, she thought of Zalmai. She had taken away the most important love in his life. His days now would be shaped by the sadness of his father being gone. Then Mariam’s steps became steady. She could walk without fighting it. A man with a gun came to her and told her to walk towards the goalpost at the south end. Mariam could feel the crowd getting more excited. She did not look up. She kept her eyes on the ground, on her shadow, on the shadow of the man who would kill her, following hers. Although there had been beautiful times in her life, Mariam knew that life had mostly been hard for her. But as she walked the last twenty steps, she could not help but wish for more of it. She wished she could see Laila again. She wished to hear her loud laugh. She wished to sit with her one more time, drinking tea and eating leftover sweet food under a sky full of stars. She was sad that she would never see Aziza grow up, would not see the beautiful young woman she would become. She would not get to paint patterns on her hands with henna and throw sweet candies at her wedding. She would never play with Aziza’s children. She would have liked that very much, to be old and play with Aziza’s children. Near the goalpost, the man behind her asked her to stop. Mariam stopped. Through the crossed lines of the burqa, she saw the shadow of his arms lift the shadow of his gun. Mariam wished for so much in those last moments. Yet as she closed her eyes, it was no longer sadness but a feeling of great peace that came over her. She thought of how she came into this world. A child born outside of marriage, of a poor villager. Something not planned, a sad, unwanted accident. Like a weed. And yet she was leaving the world as a woman who had loved and been loved back. She was leaving it as a friend, a helper, a protector. A mother. A person who mattered, at last. No. It was not so bad, Mariam thought, that she should die this way. Not so bad. This was a right ending to a life that had a wrong beginning. Mariam’s last thoughts were a few words from the holy book, which she said quietly to herself. ‘He has created the heavens and the earth with truth; He makes the night cover the day and makes the day come after the night, and He has made the sun and the moon follow His rules; each one goes for a set time; surely He is the Strong, the Great Forgiver.’<br><br>‘Kneel,’ the Talib said.<br><br>‘Oh my Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for you are the best of those who show mercy.’<br><br>‘Kneel here, sister. And look down.’ One last time, Mariam did what she was told.<br><br>PART FOUR<br><br>48. Tariq has headaches now. Some nights, Laila wakes up and finds him sitting on the edge of their bed, rocking back and forth. His undershirt is pulled over his head. The headaches started in the Nasir Bagh camp, he says, then got worse in prison. Sometimes they make him sick to his stomach, make him unable to see with one eye. He says it feels like a butcher’s knife digging into one side of his head, twisting slowly through his brain, then coming out the other side. ‘I can even taste the metal when they start.’<br><br>Sometimes Laila wets a cloth and puts it on his forehead. That helps a little. The small round white pills the doctor Sayeed found for Tariq help too. But some nights, all Tariq can do is hold his head and make sad sounds. His eyes are red, and his nose is running. Laila sits with him when he is having a headache like that. She rubs the back of his neck. She takes his hand in hers. The metal of his wedding ring feels cold against her hand.<br><br>They got married the day they arrived in Murree. Sayeed looked relieved when Tariq told him they would. He would not have to talk to Tariq about the difficult matter of a couple living in his hotel who were not married. Sayeed is not at all like Laila had imagined. He doesn’t have a red face and small eyes. He has a mustache with salt-and-pepper colours. He twists the ends to a sharp point. He has a lot of long grey hair combed back from his forehead. He is a quiet, polite man. He speaks slowly and moves gracefully. It was Sayeed who called a friend and a religious leader for the wedding ceremony that day. It was Sayeed who took Tariq aside and gave him money. Tariq didn’t want to take it, but Sayeed insisted. Tariq went to the market area then and came back with two simple, thin wedding rings. They got married later that night, after the children were asleep. In the mirror, under the green cloth the religious leader put over their heads, Laila’s eyes met Tariq’s. There were no tears, no smiles like on a wedding day, no quiet promises of love forever. In silence, Laila looked at their reflection. She saw faces that looked older than their years, with the bags and lines and loose skin that now marked their faces, which were once clean and young. Tariq opened his mouth and started to say something. But just then, someone pulled the cloth, and Laila did not hear what he was going to say. That night, they lay in bed as husband and wife. The children were sleeping below them on small beds. Laila remembered how easily she and Tariq used to fill the space between them with words when they were younger. Their quick, messy way of talking, always interrupting each other, pulling on each other’s shirts to make a point. How quickly they laughed, how eager they were to please each other. So much had happened since those childhood days. So much needed to be said. But that first night, the size of everything that had happened took the words away from her. That night, it was enough of a gift just to be next to him. It was enough of a gift to know he was here, to feel his warmth next to her, to lie with him, their heads touching, his right hand holding her left hand tightly. In the middle of the night, when Laila woke up needing a drink, she found their hands still held together, in the tight, worried way children hold balloon strings.<br><br>LAILA LIKES MURREE’S cool, foggy mornings and its beautiful sunsets. She likes the dark, bright sky at night. She likes the green of the pine trees and the soft brown of the squirrels running up and down the strong tree trunks. She likes the sudden heavy rain that makes people shopping in the market run for cover. She likes the shops selling souvenirs and the different hotels for tourists. The local people complain about the constant building work, saying it is ruining Murree’s natural beauty. Laila finds it strange that people are sad about buildings being built. In Kabul, they would be happy about it. She likes that they have a bathroom, not an outside toilet, but a real bathroom. It has a toilet that flushes, a shower, and a sink too. She can get hot or cold water from the two taps easily. She likes waking up to the sound of the goat making noise in the morning. She likes the cook, Adiba, who is grumpy but harmless and cooks wonderfully. Sometimes, as Laila watches Tariq sleep, as her children talk quietly and move in their sleep, she feels a big lump of thankfulness in her throat. It makes her eyes water.<br><br>In the mornings, Laila follows Tariq from room to room. Keys hang from a ring clipped to his trousers. A spray bottle for cleaning windows hangs from his belt loops. Laila brings a bucket filled with cleaning cloths, liquid cleaner, a brush for the toilet, and wax spray for the cupboards. Aziza walks with them. She has a mop in one hand and the doll Mariam had made for her in the other. Zalmai follows them unwillingly, sadly, always a few steps behind. Laila uses the vacuum cleaner, makes the beds, and cleans off dust. Tariq washes the bathroom sink and bath. He cleans the toilet and washes the floor. He puts clean towels, small bottles of shampoo, and bars of soap with an almond smell on the shelves. Aziza has decided that cleaning the windows with spray and a cloth is her job. The doll is always near where she works.<br><br>Laila told Aziza about Tariq a few days after the wedding. Laila thinks it is strange, almost worrying, the connection between Aziza and Tariq. Already, Aziza finishes his sentences and he finishes hers. She gives him things before he asks for them. They share private smiles across the dinner table, as if they are not new to each other but friends who have been together again after a long time apart. Aziza looked down at her hands thoughtfully when Laila told her.<br><br>‘I like him,’ she said, after a long quiet time.<br><br>‘He loves you.’<br><br>‘He said that?’<br><br>‘He doesn’t need to, Aziza.’<br><br>‘Tell me the rest, Mammy. Tell me so I know.’<br><br>And Laila did. ‘Your father is a good man. He is the best man I have ever known.’<br><br>‘What if he leaves?’ Aziza said.<br><br>‘He will never leave. Look at me, Aziza. Your father will never hurt you, and he will never leave.’<br><br>The relief on Aziza’s face made Laila feel very sad.<br><br>TARIQ HAS BOUGHT Zalmai a toy horse that rocks. He has built him a small cart. From a man in prison, he learned how to make animals from paper. So he has folded, cut, and put together many pieces of paper to make lions and kangaroos for Zalmai, and horses and colourful birds. But Zalmai does not accept these gifts. Sometimes he is angry about them. ‘You are a donkey!’ he cries. ‘I don’t want your toys!’<br><br>‘Zalmai!’ Laila says, shocked.<br><br>‘It is okay,’ Tariq says. ‘Laila, it is okay. Let him.’<br><br>‘You are not my Baba jan! My real Baba jan is away on a trip. When he gets back, he is going to beat you up! And you will not be able to run away, because he has two legs and you only have one!’ At night, Laila holds Zalmai close to her and says the Babaloo prayers with him. When he asks, she tells him the lie again. She tells him his Baba jan has gone away and she does not know when he will come back. She hates doing this. She hates herself for lying like this to a child. Laila knows that this shameful lie will have to be told again and again. It will have to be told because Zalmai will ask, when he gets off a swing, when he wakes up from a nap in the afternoon. Later, when he is old enough to tie his own shoes, to walk to school by himself, the lie will have to be told again. At some point, Laila knows, the questions will stop. Slowly, Zalmai will stop wondering why his father has left him. He will not see his father anymore at traffic lights, in old men walking slowly down the street or drinking tea in open tea houses. And one day he will realize, walking along a river, or looking out at snow where no one has walked, that his father’s leaving is no longer a fresh, painful wound. It has become something else entirely, something softer and less sharp. Like a story from the past. Something to respect, to feel mystery about. Laila is happy here in Murree. But it is not an easy happiness. It is a happiness that has a cost.<br><br>ON HIS DAYS OFF, Tariq takes Laila and the children to the market area. There are shops selling small things, and next to it is a church built in the middle of the 1800s. Tariq buys them spicy meat on sticks from people selling food on the street. They walk among the crowds of local people, the Europeans with their mobile phones and cameras, the people from Punjab who come here to escape the heat of the plains. Sometimes, they get on a bus to Kashmir Point. From there, Tariq shows them the valley of the Jhelum River, the hills covered with pine trees, and the thick, green hills where he says monkeys can still be seen jumping from branch to branch. They also go to Nathia Gali, about thirty kilometers from Murree, where there are many maple trees. Tariq holds Laila’s hand as they walk on the road shaded by trees to the Governor’s House. They stop by the old British cemetery, or take a taxi up a mountain peak to see the green, foggy valley below. Sometimes on these trips, when they pass by a shop window, Laila sees their reflections. Man, wife, daughter, son. To people who do not know them, she knows, they must look like the most normal of families, without secrets, lies, or sadness about the past.<br><br>AZIZA HAS NIGHTMARES from which she wakes up screaming.Laila has to lie next to her on the bed, wipe her face with her sleeve, and help her go back to sleep. Laila has her own dreams. In her dreams, she is always back in her house in Kabul. She walks in the hall, goes up the stairs. She is alone, but behind the doors, she hears the regular sound of an iron, bedsheets being shaken and folded. Sometimes she hears a woman singing an old song quietly. But when she goes into the room, it is empty. There is nobody there. These dreams make Laila feel very upset. She wakes up covered in sweat, her eyes feeling sharp with tears. It is very sad. Every time, it is very sad.

One Sunday in September, Laila was putting Zalmai, who had a cold, down for a rest when Tariq came quickly into their small house. “Did you hear?” he said, breathing fast a little. “They killed him. Ahmad Shah Massoud. He is dead.” “What?”

From the door, Tariq told her what he knew. “They say he was giving an interview to two reporters who said they were Belgians from Morocco. While they were talking, a bomb hidden in the video camera exploded. It killed Massoud and one reporter. They shot the other one when he tried to run away. Now they are saying the reporters were probably men from Al-Qaeda.”

Laila remembered the picture of Ahmad Shah Massoud that Mammy had put on the wall of her bedroom. Massoud leaning forward, one eyebrow up, his face looking serious, as if he was listening carefully to someone. Laila remembered how thankful Mammy was that Massoud had said a prayer at her sons’ graves, how she told everyone about it. Even after his group started fighting with others, Mammy did not blame him. He’s a good man, she used to say. He wants peace. He wants to build Afghanistan again. But they won’t let him. They just won’t let him. For Mammy, even at the end, even after everything went very badly and Kabul was destroyed, Massoud was still the Lion of Panjshir.

Laila did not forgive so easily. Massoud dying a violent death did not make her happy, but she remembered very well the areas destroyed when he was in charge, the bodies pulled from the fallen buildings, the hands and feet of children found on roofs or high in a tree days after their funerals. She remembered very clearly the look on Mammy’s face just before the rocket hit, and, even though she tried hard to forget, Babi’s body without a head landing nearby, the picture of a bridge on his T-shirt showing through thick smoke and blood.

“There is going to be a funeral,” Tariq was saying. “I am sure of it. Probably in Rawalpindi. It will be very big.”

Zalmai, who was almost asleep, was sitting up now, rubbing his eyes with his small hands.

Two days later, they were cleaning a room when they heard a lot of noise. Tariq dropped the mop and went out quickly. Laila followed him.

The noise was coming from the hotel lobby. There was a sitting area to the right of the front desk, with chairs and two sofas. In the corner, facing the sofas, was a television, and Sayeed, the man who worked at the desk, and some guests were standing in front of it. Laila and Tariq moved closer.

The TV was showing the BBC channel. On the screen was a building, a tower, with black smoke coming from its top floors. Tariq said something to Sayeed, and Sayeed was answering when a plane appeared from the side of the screen. It hit the tower next to the first one, exploding into a large fire that looked much bigger than any fire Laila had ever seen. Everyone in the lobby made a sound of surprise together. In less than two hours, both towers fell down.

Soon all the TV channels were talking about Afghanistan and the Taliban and Osama bin Laden.

“DID YOU HEAR what the Taliban said?” Tariq asked. “About bin Laden?” Aziza was sitting across from him on the bed, looking at the chess board. Tariq had taught her to play chess. She was frowning and touching her lower lip now, copying how her father looked when he was deciding what to do. Zalmai’s cold was a little better. He was asleep, and Laila was rubbing medicine on his chest.

“I heard,” she said.

The Taliban had said they would not give bin Laden away because he is a mehman, a guest, who has found a safe place in Afghanistan and it is against the Pashtun rules to give a guest away. Tariq laughed sadly, and Laila heard in his laugh that he was very unhappy about this wrong use of a good Pashtun custom, this wrong idea of his people’s ways.

A few days after the attacks, Laila and Tariq were in the hotel lobby again. On the TV screen, George W. Bush was speaking. There was a big American flag behind him. At one point, his voice shook a little, and Laila thought he was going to cry. Sayeed, who spoke English, explained to them that Bush had just said they were going to war.

“On whom?” said Tariq.

“On your country, to begin with.”

* * *

“IT MAY NOT be such a bad thing,” Tariq said.

They had finished making love. He was lying next to her, his head on her chest, his arm on her stomach. The first few times they tried, it was difficult. Tariq said sorry many times, Laila said it was okay many times. There were still difficulties, not with their bodies now, but with the situation. The small house they shared with the children was not big. The children slept on beds below them, so there was not much private space. Most times, Laila and Tariq made love quietly, with controlled feelings, fully dressed under the blanket to be careful in case the children woke up. They were always worried about the sound of the sheets moving, the bed making noise. But for Laila, being with Tariq was worth having these worries. When they made love, Laila felt safe, she felt protected. Her worries, that their life together was only for a short time, that soon it would fall apart again, were made less strong. Her fears of being separated disappeared.

“What do you mean?” she said now.

“What is happening back home. It may not be so bad in the end.”

Back home, bombs were falling again, this time American bombs—Laila had been watching pictures of the war every day on the television as she changed sheets and cleaned the rooms. The Americans had given weapons to the warlords again, and asked for help from the Northern Alliance to make the Taliban leave and find bin Laden. But what Tariq was saying made Laila angry. She pushed his head roughly off her chest.

“Not so bad? People dying? Women, children, old people? Homes destroyed again? Not so bad?”

“Shh. You will wake the children.”

“How can you say that, Tariq?” she said sharply. “After the mistake in Karam? A hundred innocent people! You saw the bodies yourself!”

“No,” Tariq said. He sat up on his elbow, looked down at Laila. “You don’t understand. What I meant was—”

“You wouldn’t know,” Laila said. She knew her voice was getting louder, that they were having their first fight as husband and wife. “You left when the fighters started fighting, remember? I stayed. Me. I know war. War killed my parents. My parents, Tariq. And now you say war is not so bad?”

“I am sorry, Laila. I am sorry.” He held her face in his hands. “You are right. I am sorry. Please forgive me. What I meant was that maybe there will be hope after this war finishes, that maybe for the first time in a long time—”

“I don’t want to talk about this anymore,” Laila said, surprised at how she had spoken angrily to him. It was not fair, she knew, what she said to him—war had killed his parents too—and the anger in her was already becoming less strong. Tariq continued to speak gently, and, when he brought her close to him, she let him. When he kissed her hand, then her forehead, she let him. She knew that he was probably right. She knew what he meant by his comment. Maybe this war was needed. Maybe there would be hope when Bush’s bombs stopped falling. But she could not say it, not when what happened to Babi and Mammy was happening to someone now in Afghanistan, not when some girl or boy back home who did not expect it had just lost their parents because of a rocket, like she had. Laila could not say it. It was hard to feel happy. It felt wrong and strange.

That night, Zalmai woke up coughing. Before Laila could move, Tariq moved his legs to get out of bed. He put on his artificial leg and walked to Zalmai, lifted him into his arms. From the bed, Laila watched Tariq’s shape moving back and forth in the dark. She saw the shape of Zalmai’s head on his shoulder, his hands holding Tariq’s neck, his small feet moving up and down near Tariq’s side. When Tariq came back to bed, neither of them spoke. Laila reached over and touched his face. Tariq’s face was wet.

50. For Laila, life in Murree was comfortable and peaceful. The work was not hard, and, on their days off, she and Tariq took the children to ride the chairlift up Patriata hill, or went to Pindi Point, where, on a clear day, you could see far away to Islamabad and Rawalpindi city. There, they put a blanket on the grass and ate meatball sandwiches with cucumbers and drank cold ginger ale. It was a good life, Laila told herself, a life to be thankful for. It was, in fact, exactly the kind of life she used to dream for herself during her worst times with Rasheed. Every day, Laila reminded herself of this.

Then one warm night in July 2002, she and Tariq were lying in bed talking quietly about all the changes back home. There had been many changes. The armies from different countries had made the Taliban leave every main city, pushed them across the border to Pakistan and into the mountains in the south and east of Afghanistan. ISAF, a group of soldiers from different countries to keep the peace, had been sent to Kabul. The country had a temporary president now, Hamid Karzai. Laila decided that now was the right time to tell Tariq.

A year ago, she would have been very happy to leave Kabul. But in the last few months, she had started to miss the city where she grew up. She missed the busy Shor Bazaar, the Gardens of Babur, the calls of the people carrying water in bags made of goat skin. She missed the people arguing about clothes prices on Chicken Street and the people selling melons in Karteh-Parwan. But it wasn’t just missing home or thinking about the past that made Laila think of Kabul so much these days. She felt unhappy and wanted to move. She heard about schools being built in Kabul, roads being fixed, women going back to work, and her life here, even though it was pleasant, even though she was thankful for it, felt… not enough for her. Not important. Worse yet, like a waste of time. Recently, she had started hearing Babi’s voice in her head. You can be anything you want, Laila, he says. I know this about you. And I also know that when this war is over, Afghanistan will need you.

Laila heard Mammy’s voice too. She remembered what Mammy said to Babi when he said they should leave Afghanistan. I want to see my sons’ dream come true. I want to be there when it happens, when Afghanistan is free, so the boys see it too. They’ll see it through my eyes. A part of Laila now wanted to return to Kabul, for Mammy and Babi, for them to see it through her eyes. And then, the strongest reason for Laila, was Mariam. Did Mariam die for this? Laila asked herself. Did she give her life so she, Laila, could be a cleaner in another country? Maybe it wouldn’t matter to Mariam what Laila did as long as she and the children were safe and happy. But it mattered to Laila. Suddenly, it was very important. “I want to go back,” she said.

Tariq sat up in bed and looked down at her.

Laila noticed again how good-looking he was, the perfect shape of his forehead, the strong but thin muscles of his arms, his serious, clever eyes. A year had passed, and there were still times, like this moment, when Laila could not believe that they had found each other again, that he was really here, with her, that he was her husband. “Back? To Kabul?” he asked.

“Only if you want it too.”

“Are you unhappy here? You seem happy. The children too.”

Laila sat up. Tariq moved on the bed, making space for her. “I am happy,” Laila said. “Of course I am. But… what do we do next, Tariq? How long do we stay? This is not home. Kabul is, and back there so much is happening, a lot of it good. I want to be a part of it all. I want to do something. I want to help. Do you understand?”

Tariq nodded slowly. “This is what you want, then? Are you sure?”

“I want it, yes, I’m sure. But it’s more than that. I feel like I have to go back. Staying here, it doesn’t feel right anymore.” Tariq looked at his hands, then back up at her. “But only—only—if you want to go too.”

Tariq smiled. The lines on his forehead disappeared, and for a short time he was the old Tariq again, the Tariq who did not worry, who had once said that in Siberia snot turned to ice before it hit the ground. Maybe it was her imagination, but Laila believed she saw this happy side of the old Tariq more often these days. “Me?” he said. “I’ll follow you anywhere, Laila.”

She pulled him close and kissed his lips. She believed she had never loved him more than at this moment. “Thank you,” she said, her forehead resting against his. “Let’s go home.”

“But first, I want to go to Herat,” she said.

“Herat?”

Laila explained.

* * *

THE CHILDREN NEEDED to feel safe and calm, each in their own way. Laila had to sit down with a worried Aziza, who still had bad dreams, who had been so scared she cried the week before when someone had fired guns into the air at a wedding nearby. Laila had to explain to Aziza that when they return to Kabul the Taliban won’t be there, that there will not be any fighting, and that she will not be sent back to the orphanage. “We’ll all live together. Your father, me, Zalmai. And you, Aziza. You’ll never, ever, have to be apart from me again. I promise.” She smiled at her daughter. “Until the day you want to, that is. When you fall in love with some young man and want to marry him.”

On the day they leave Murree, Zalmai was very, very sad. He had put his arms around Alyona’s neck and would not let go. “I can’t make him let go of her, Mammy,” said Aziza. “Zalmai. We can’t take a goat on the bus,” Laila explained again. It wasn’t until Tariq got down on his knees beside him, until he promised Zalmai that he would buy him a goat just like Alyona in Kabul, that Zalmai let go, not wanting to. There were sad goodbyes with tears with Sayeed as well. For good luck, he held a Koran, a holy book, near the door for Tariq, Laila, and the children to kiss three times, then held it high so they could pass under it. He helped Tariq put the two suitcases in the back of his car. It was Sayeed who drove them to the station, who stood by the road waving goodbye as the bus made noise and started moving away. As she sat back and watched Sayeed getting smaller in the back window of the bus, Laila started to think maybe this was not a good idea. Were they being foolish, she wondered, leaving the safe place of Murree? Going back to the country where her parents and brothers died, where the smoke of bombs was only now stopping? And then, from the sad parts of her memory, she remembered two lines of a poem, Babi’s poem saying goodbye to Kabul: One could not count the moons that shine softly on her roofs, Or the thousand splendid suns that hide behind her walls. Laila sat back in her seat, drying her eyes by blinking. Kabul was waiting. Needing. This journey home was the right thing to do. But first there was one last goodbye to say.

THE WARS IN Afghanistan had badly damaged the roads connecting Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar. The easiest way to Herat now was by going through Mashad, a city in Iran. Laila and her family were there only for one night. They slept in a hotel for the night, and, the next morning, they got on another bus. Mashad was a crowded, busy city. Laila watched as parks, mosques, and restaurants passed by. When the bus passed the holy building for Imam Reza, Laila stretched her neck to see its shiny tiles, the tall towers, the beautiful gold roof, all of it kept perfectly clean and cared for with love. She thought of the large Buddha statues in her own country. They were now just tiny pieces of dust, blowing around the Bamiyan Valley in the wind. The bus ride to the border between Iran and Afghanistan took almost ten hours. The land became more empty and dry as they got closer to Afghanistan. Just before they went over the border into Herat, they passed a camp for Afghan people who left their homes. To Laila, it looked like unclear shapes of yellow dust and black tents and small, simple buildings made of metal sheets with waves. She reached across the seat and took Tariq’s hand.

IN HERAT, most of the streets were paved, with trees that smelled nice along the sides. There were parks and libraries being built by the city, gardens that were neatly cared for, buildings that had just been painted. The traffic lights worked, and, Laila was most surprised, the electricity was always on. Laila had heard that the strong leader of Herat, Ismail Khan, had helped build the city again using the large amount of money he collected from taxes at the border, money that Kabul said belonged not to him but to the main government. People spoke about him with respect and fear when the taxi driver who took them to Muwaffaq Hotel said Ismail Khan’s name. The two-night stay at the Muwaffaq would take almost one fifth of the money they had saved, but the journey from Mashad had been long and tiring, and the children were very tired. The old man working at the desk told Tariq, as he got the room key, that the Muwaffaq was popular with many reporters and people who work for charities. “Bin Laden slept here once,” he said proudly. The room had two beds, and a bathroom where cold water came from the tap. There was a picture of the poet Khaja Abdullah Ansary on the wall between the beds. From the window, Laila could see the busy street below, and a park across the street with paths made of light-colored bricks going through many flowers. The children, who were now used to watching TV, were sad because there was no TV in the room. But soon, they fell asleep. Soon, Tariq and Laila also fell asleep, very tired. Laila slept very well while Tariq held her, only one time during the night when she woke up from a dream she could not remember.

THE NEXT MORNING, after eating and drinking tea with fresh bread, jam made from quince, and boiled eggs, Tariq helped her find a taxi. “Are you sure you don’t want me to come along?” Tariq said. Aziza was holding his hand. Zalmai was not, but he was standing near Tariq, resting one shoulder on Tariq’s side. “I’m sure.” “I worry.” “I’ll be fine,” Laila said. “I promise. Take the children to a market. Buy them something.” Zalmai started crying when the taxi started driving away, and, when Laila looked back, she saw that he was trying to touch Tariq. The fact that he was starting to like Tariq made Laila feel happy and sad at the same time.

“YOU’RE NOT FROM HERAT,” the driver said. He had dark hair down to his shoulders—many people did this to show they were happy the Taliban were gone, Laila had learned—and a mark on his face going through his mustache on the left side. There was a photo stuck on the front window, on his side. It was a picture of a young girl with rosy cheeks and her hair divided in the middle into two long twisted pieces. Laila told him that she had been in Pakistan for the past year, that she was returning to Kabul. “Deh-Mazang.”

Looking through the front window, she saw workers joining metal handles to pots made of copper, workers who make seats for horses putting pieces of animal skin outside to dry in the sun. “Have you lived here long, brother?” she asked. “Oh, my whole life. I was born here. I’ve seen everything. You remember the uprising?” Laila says she does, but he continued. “This happened a long time ago in March 1979, about nine months before soldiers from the Soviet Union came into Afghanistan. Some people from Herat who were angry killed some people from the Soviet Union who were helping the government, so the Soviet soldiers sent military vehicles and flying machines and attacked this city very hard. For three days, sister, they shot at the city. They made buildings fall down, broke one of the tall towers of the mosque, killed thousands of people. Thousands. I lost two sisters in those three days. One of them was twelve years old.” He tapped the photo on his front window. “That’s her.” “I’m sorry,” Laila said, thinking with surprise how every story from Afghanistan has sadness, losing people, and pain that is hard to imagine. But even so, she saw, people find a way to live and continue. Laila thought about her life and everything that happened to her, and she was very surprised that she too had survived, that she was living and sitting in this taxi listening to this man tell his story.

GUL DAMAN IS a village with some houses that have walls, among small, flat huts built using mud and dried grass. Outside the huts, Laila saw women with red faces from the sun making food, their faces were wet from the hot air coming from large, dark cooking pots placed on simple places made for burning wood. Donkeys were eating from long boxes. Children who were running after chickens started running after the taxi. Laila saw men moving carts with one wheel that were full of rocks. They stopped working and looked at the taxi as it went past. The driver changed direction, and they passed a place where people are buried, with an old tomb in the middle. The driver told her that a religious man from the village is buried there. There was also a machine that turns using wind power. Under the shadow of its parts that catch the wind, which were not moving and were red-brown, three small boys were sitting with their knees bent, playing with mud. The driver stopped the taxi and put his head and body out of the window. The boy who looked like he was the oldest was the one who talked to him. He showed the way to a house that was further along the road. The driver said thank you, and started driving the taxi again. He stopped the taxi outside the house that had walls and only one level. Laila saw the tops of trees that grow figs over the walls, some of the tree parts hanging over the wall. “I won’t be long,” she said to the driver.

THE MIDDLE-AGED man who opens the door is short, thin, with red-brown hair. His beard has straight lines of gray hair. He is wearing a long coat over his shirt and trousers. They said the usual greeting 'peace be upon you' to each other. “Is this Mullah Faizullah’s house?” Laila asked. “Yes. I am his son, Hamza. Can I help you, sister?” “I am here to ask about a friend of your father from a long time ago, Mariam.” Hamza quickly closed and opened his eyes. He looked confused for a moment. “Mariam…” “Jalil Khan’s daughter.” He quickly closed and opened his eyes again. Then he put his hand on his face and he started to smile brightly that showed some of his teeth were gone and some were bad. “Oh!” he said. It came out sounding like Ohhhhhh, like pushing air out of his lungs. “Oh! Mariam! Are you her daughter? Is she—” He was turning his head quickly now, looking behind Laila, wanting very much to see someone, trying to find her. “Is Mariam here?” “I am sad to say, she has died.” The smile disappeared from Hamza’s face. For a short time, they stood there, at the entrance, Hamza looking down at the earth. A donkey made its loud noise from somewhere nearby. “Come in,” Hamza said. He opened the door wide. “Please come in.”

THEY SIT ON the floor in a room that does not have much furniture. There is a carpet from Herat on the floor, cushions with beads on them to use as seats, and a picture of the holy city of Mecca in a frame on the wall. They sit near the window that is open, on each side of a long, thin area of sun coming through the window. Laila hears women speaking very quietly from a different room. A small boy without shoes puts a plate with green tea and sweet candy with nuts in front of them. Hamza moved his head to show thanks to him. “My son.” The boy leaves without making any noise. “So tell me,” Hamza said, sounding tired. Laila told him the story. She told him all the details. It took more time than she thought it would. Near the end, she found it hard to stay calm and not cry. Even after one year, it is still not easy to talk about Mariam. When she finished, Hamza was quiet for a long time. He slowly moved his tea cup around on the small plate under it, first one direction, then the other direction. “My father, I hope he is peaceful in heaven, liked her very, very much,” he said at last. “He was the person who sang the prayer call into her ear when she was born, you know. He went to see her every week, he always went. Sometimes I went with him. He was her teacher, yes, but he was also her friend. My father was a kind man who helped others. He was very sad when Jalil Khan sent her away to marry.” “I am sad to hear that your father has died. I pray that God forgives him.” Hamza moved his head up and down to show he is thankful. “He lived for a very long time. He actually lived longer than Jalil Khan. We put his body in the ground in the place where people are buried in the village, near the place where Mariam's mother is buried. My father was a very, very kind man, he will surely go to heaven.” Laila put her tea cup down. “Can I ask you a question?” “Of course.” “Can you show me?” she says. “The place where Mariam lived. Can you bring me to that place?”

THE DRIVER SAID he would wait for a bit more time. Hamza and Laila left the village and walked down the slope on the road between Gul Daman and Herat. After about 15 minutes, he showed her a small space in the high grass that was on both sides of the road. “That’s how you get there,” he says. “There is a small way to walk there.” The path was not smooth, it turned a lot, and it was not very light, under the plants and small bushes. The wind made the high grass hit Laila's lower legs as she and Hamza walked up the path, following the bends. On both sides of them were many different colors of wild flowers, moving gently in the wind, some are high with flower parts that bend, others are short with leaves that look like a fan. In some places, a few wild yellow flowers that looked a bit messy showed slightly through the short bushes. Laila heard the sound of small birds singing above them and the loud noise of insects under their feet. They walked up the slope like this for a long distance, about 200 yards or more. Then the path became flat and led to a flatter area of ground. They stopped to rest and breathe normally. Laila gently wiped her forehead with the sleeve of her shirt and tried to hit a group of flying insects that were staying in the air in front of her face. Here she saw the mountains that were not very high far away where the sky meets the land, some types of trees called cottonwoods and poplars, different kinds of wild plants that she did not know the names of. “Before, there was a small river here,” Hamza says, breathing a bit fast because he walked uphill. “But it has been dry for a long time now.” He says he will stay in this place. He tells her to walk across the place where the stream used to be, walk in the direction of the mountains. “I’ll wait here,” he says, sitting on a large stone under a poplar tree. “You go on.” “I won't be long—” “Don’t worry. Don't hurry. Go ahead, sister.” Laila said thank you to him. She walked across the place where the stream was, walking by putting her feet on different stones. She saw pieces of glass bottles among the stones, metal containers that were old and red from water, and a metal box with a lid made of zinc that had green/white growth on it and was partly in the earth. She walked towards the mountains, towards the trees called weeping willows, she could see these trees now, the long parts of the tree hanging down were moving with every strong wind. Her heart was beating very fast in her chest. She saw that the willow trees were in the order Mariam said they would be, in a round group of trees with an open space in the center. Laila walked more quickly, nearly running now. She turned her head to look behind her and saw that Hamza looked very small, his coat was a bright color against the brown skin of the trees. She hit her foot on a stone and nearly fell down, then stood straight again. She moved quickly for the rest of the distance with the bottom parts of her pants lifted up. She was breathing fast by the time she got to the willow trees.

Mariam’s small hut was still in this place. When she got close to it, Laila saw that the single piece of glass in the window was gone and the door was not there. Mariam had said there was a place for chickens, a special oven, and a wooden toilet outside too, but Laila cannot see any of these things. She stopped at the door of the hut. She can hear insects making noise inside. To go inside, she has to move sideways to avoid a big spider's web that is moving in the wind. It is not very bright inside. Laila has to wait a short time for her eyes to get used to the low light. When her eyes can see better, she sees that the inside is even smaller than she thought it would be. Only half of one old, broken piece of wood from the floor is still there. She thinks the other parts were taken up to be burned for heat or cooking. The floor is now covered with leaves that are dry at the edges, pieces of glass bottles, papers from old chewing gum that people threw away, small plants that grow in the ground without being planted, the ends of old cigarettes that have turned yellow. But most of the floor is covered with wild plants that grow where they are not wanted, some that have not grown very tall, some growing boldly partway up the walls. Fifteen years, Laila thinks. 15 years in this place. Laila sat on the floor, with her back against the wall. She heard the sound of the wind moving through the willow trees. There were more spider's webs going across the top of the room. Someone had written something on one wall using paint from a can, but a lot of the paint had come off, and Laila cannot read what it says. Then she understood that the writing is in the Russian language. There was a bird's home that is not used anymore in one corner of the room, and an animal that flies at night hanging with its head down in another corner, in the place where the wall and the low top of the room meet. Laila shut her eyes and sat there for some time.

When she was in Pakistan, sometimes it was hard to remember what Mariam's face looked like in detail. Sometimes, Mariam's face was hard to remember, like a word you know but cannot say right now. But now, in this hut, it is easy to see Mariam in her mind when her eyes are closed: the gentle, calm look in her eyes, her chin that was long, the skin on her neck that was rough, the smile where she did not show her teeth. Here, Laila can feel like she is putting her face on Mariam's soft legs again, can feel Mariam moving gently from side to side, saying parts of the holy book, can feel the words moving through Mariam's body, down to her knees, and into Laila's ears. Then, quickly, the wild plants started to go away, like something is pulling their roots from under the earth. They went down more and more until the ground in the hut has covered the last parts of their leaves that feel sharp. The spider's webs disappeared in a surprising way. The bird's home took itself apart, the small pieces of wood breaking free one by one, moving out of the hut turning over and over. Something you cannot see removed the Russian writing from the wall. The wooden parts of the floor were there again. Laila now saw two simple beds, a table made of wood, two seats, a metal stove in the corner, flat pieces of wood on the walls to put things on, where there were cooking pots made of clay and metal, a dark pot for boiling water for tea, things for drinking and eating. She heard birds making noise outside, the quiet sound of the stream far away. Mariam when she was young was sitting at the table making a toy person using the light from a lamp that uses oil. She was singing a tune with her mouth closed. Her face was soft and looks young, her hair is clean and brushed away from her face. None of her teeth are missing. Laila watched Mariam stick pieces of thread onto the doll's head. After some years, this small girl will grow up to be a woman who will not ask for much from life, who will never cause problems for other people, who will never show that she has also been sad, been let down, or had her hopes laughed at. A woman who will be strong and stay in one place, like a rock in a river, staying strong without saying she is unhappy, her good qualities not made dirty but made stronger by the difficult things that happen to her. Laila can already see something in the young girl's eyes, something very strong inside her, that Rasheed and the Taliban will not be able to destroy. Something as strong and not changing as a hard stone. Something that, finally, will cause her death but will save Laila. The little girl lifted her head to look. Stopped making the doll. Smiled. “Laila jo?”

Laila opened her eyes very quickly. She took a quick, deep breath because she was surprised, and her body moved forward suddenly. She scared the bat, which moved very quickly from one side of the hut to the other, the sound of its wings moving is like the sound of pages quickly turning in a book, before it went out through the window. Laila stood up, hit the dry leaves off the part of her pants where she was sitting. She walked out of the hut. Outside, the light was a little different now. The air was moving strongly, making the grass move like waves and the parts of the willow trees make a sound like clicking. Before she leaves the open space, Laila looked one more time at the hut where Mariam had slept, ate, had dreams, waited anxiously for Jalil. On walls that were bending down, the willow trees made shapes of light and shadow that were not straight and changed with every strong wind. A black bird had come down onto the flat top of the hut. It hit something with its beak, made a loud, rough sound, flew away. “Good-bye, Mariam.” And, as she says this, not knowing that she is crying, Laila started to run in the grass. She found Hamza still sitting on the large stone. When he saw her, he got up. “Let’s go back,” he says. Then, “I have something for you.”

LAILA WAITED FOR Hamza in the garden near the main door. The boy who brought them tea before was standing under one of the trees that grow figs, holding a chicken, looking at her without showing any feelings. Laila saw two people looking, an old woman and a young girl wearing head coverings, watching her shyly from a window. The door of the house opened and Hamza came out. He was holding a box. He gave the box to Laila. “Jalil Khan gave this box to my father about a month before he died,” Hamza says. “He asked my father to keep it safe for Mariam until she came to ask for it. My father had it for two years. Then, just before he died, he gave it to me, and told me to keep it for Mariam. But she… you know, she did not come.” Laila looked down at the metal box that is shaped like an oval. It looked like a box that used to hold chocolate a long time ago. Its color was green like olives, with gold colored shapes that were becoming less bright all around the top that opens. The sides had some red-brown marks from water and age, and two very small marks where it has been hit on the edge of the top. Laila attempted to open the box, but the part that keeps it closed was locked. “What’s in it?” she asks. Hamza puts a small metal tool for opening locks in the flat part of her hand. “My father never opened it with the key. I did not open it either. I think God wanted you to be the one to open it.”

When she returned to the hotel, Tariq and the children had not returned yet. Laila sat on the bed, with the box on her legs. A part of her wished to not open it, let whatever Jalil wanted to give Mariam stay hidden. But, finally, her wish to know is too powerful. She put the key into the lock. She has to move and shake it a bit, but she opened the box. Inside, she finds three items: a paper cover for a letter, a small bag made of rough cloth, and a tape for watching movies on a TV. Laila takes the tape and goes to the place where people check in at the hotel. She finds out from the old man working there who said hello to them the day before that the hotel only has one machine for playing video tapes, in its largest and most expensive room. The large room is empty now, and he says he will bring her there. He lets a young man with hair above his lip who is wearing a suit take care of the desk, who is speaking on a mobile phone. The old man working at the desk takes Laila up to the second level, to a door at the end of a long passage. He opened the lock, allows her to enter. Laila sees the television in the corner of the room. She does not notice anything else about the large room. She makes the television start, makes the tape machine start. Puts the tape inside and presses the button to start watching. The TV screen is black for a short time, and Laila starts to think why Jalil would give Mariam a tape with nothing on it. But then she hears music, and pictures start to show on the screen. Laila makes her face show she is unhappy or confused. She continues watching for one or two minutes. Then she presses the button to stop, moves the tape quickly forward, and presses the button to start watching again. It is the same movie. The old clerk is looking at her like he has a question. The movie showing on the screen is called Pinocchio, made by Walt Disney. Laila does not know why this movie is on the tape.

Tariq and the children return to the hotel a little after 6 o'clock. Aziza runs to Laila and shows her the small pieces of jewelry for her ears that Tariq bought, they are silver and have a colorful butterfly on each one. Zalmai is holding tightly a toy dolphin filled with air that makes a high sound when its nose is pressed. “Are you okay?” Tariq asks, putting his arm around Laila's upper body. “I’m fine,” Laila replies. “I will tell you about it later.” They walk to a restaurant that sells cooked meat on a stick, which is close by, to have food. It is a small restaurant, with table covers made of plastic that feel sticky, with a lot of smoke and noisy. But the meat from the young sheep is soft and not dry, and the bread is warm. They walk around the streets for some time after eating. Tariq buys ice cream with a rose smell from a small shop on the street for the children. They eat while sitting on a seat, the shape of the mountains behind them is dark against the bright red color of the sky as the sun goes down. The air is warm, full of the strong, pleasant smell of cedar trees.

Laila had opened the paper cover for the letter before, when she returned to the room after watching the video tape. Inside the envelope was a letter, written by hand with blue ink on yellow paper with lines. It said: May 13, 1987. My dear Mariam: I hope that you are well when you read this letter. As you know, I came to the city of Kabul one month ago to talk to you. But you did not want to meet me. I was sad, but I understood why you did that. If I were you, maybe I would have done the same thing. You stopped liking me and being kind to me a long time ago and it is my fault. But if you are reading this, then you have read the letter I left for you at your house. You read it and you came to visit Mullah Faizullah, like I asked you to. I am thankful that you came, dear Mariam. I am thankful for this time to speak to you a little. How should I start? I have been very sad since the last time we talked, dear Mariam. Your stepmother Afsoon died on the first day of the fighting in 1979. A bullet that was not meant for her killed your sister Niloufar on the same day. I still remember her, my little Niloufar, standing on her head to make visitors think she was good. Your brother Farhad joined the holy war in 1980. Soldiers from the Soviet Union killed him in 1982, near a place called Helmand. I never saw his dead body. I do not know if you have your own children, dear Mariam, but if you do, I pray that God will protect them and you will not feel the great sadness that I have felt. I still have dreams about them. I still have dreams about my children who have died. I also have dreams about you, dear Mariam. I miss you. I miss hearing you speak and laugh. I miss reading to you, and all the times we caught fish together. Can you remember all the times we went fishing together? You were a good child, dear Mariam, and I always feel bad and wish I had done things differently when I think about you. Wanting to change the past… About you, dear Mariam, I have a lot of feelings of wanting to change the past. I wish I had seen you the day you came to Herat. I wish I had opened the door and let you live with me. I wish I had treated you like my daughter, that I allowed you to live in that hut for all those years. Why did I do that? Was I afraid of looking bad to others? Was I afraid of ruining my reputation, which people said was good? Those things are not important to me now after losing so much, and seeing all the terrible things in this bad war. But now, sadly, I cannot change it. Maybe this is fair punishment for people who did not have kind hearts, to understand only when they cannot change things back. Now the only thing I can do is say that you were a good child, dear Mariam, and that I was not good enough for you. Now the only thing I can do is ask you to forgive me. So please forgive me, dear Mariam. Please forgive me. Please forgive me. Please forgive me. I do not have a lot of money now, like I did when you knew me. The government took away a lot of my land and also all of my shops. But it is not important to complain about this, because God—for reasons I do not know—has still given me much more than most people have. Since I came back from Kabul, I was able to sell the small amount of land I still had. I have put inside this letter the money that is yours after I die. You can see that it is not a lot of money, but it is some money. It is some money. (You will also see that I decided to change the money into American dollars. I think this is the best thing to do. Only God knows what will happen to our own money, which is having many problems. ) I hope you do not believe that I am trying to get you to forgive me by giving you money. I hope you will believe that I know you cannot buy your forgiveness. It was never possible to buy it. I am just giving you, even though it is late, what should have been yours from the beginning. I was not a good father to you when I was alive. Maybe after I die I can be a good father. Ah, dying. I will not give you problems by telling you everything, but I know I will die soon. My heart is weak, the doctors say. I think it is the right way for a weak man to die. Dear Mariam, I am brave enough, I am brave enough to hope that, after you read this, you will be kinder to me than I ever was to you. That you might feel kind enough to come and visit me, your father. That you will hit my door one more time and let me open the door this time, to say you are welcome, to hold you in my arms, my child, like I should have done many years ago. This hope is not strong, just like my heart. I know this is true. But I will wait. I will listen for the sound of you hitting the door. I will continue to hope. I pray that God gives you a long and successful life, my child. I pray that God gives you many children who are well and nice to look at. I pray that you find the feeling of being happy, calm, and accepted, which I did not give you. Stay healthy and happy. I trust you to God's kind care. Your father who did not deserve you, Jalil.

That evening, after they return to the hotel, after the children have played and are sleeping, Laila talks to Tariq about the letter. She lets him see the money in the small cloth bag. When she starts to cry, he kisses her face and puts his arms around her.

51. April 2003. The time without rain has finished. Finally, snow came last winter, up to the knees, and now rain has been falling for many days. The river in Kabul is moving water again. The water from the river in spring has taken away the area called Titanic City. Now there is wet earth on the roads. Shoes make a wet sound when you walk. Cars cannot move easily. Donkeys carrying many apples walk slowly and with difficulty, their feet are throwing wet dirt from the pools of water made by rain. But nobody is saying bad things about the mud, nobody is sad that Titanic City is gone. People say, We need Kabul to have plants and trees again. Yesterday, Laila saw her children playing in the heavy rain, jumping from one pool of water to another, in the garden behind their house, under a sky that looks dark gray like the metal lead. She was looking from the window in the room where food is cooked, of the small house with two rooms for sleeping that they are paying to live in, in Deh-Mazang. There is a tree that grows pomegranates in the garden and a group of wild rose bushes. Tariq has fixed the walls and made a slide and swings for the children, a small area with a fence for the new goat Tariq bought for Zalmai. Laila saw the rain water run off Zalmai's head—he asked for his hair to be cut very short, like Tariq, who is now the one who says the special prayers before sleep. The rain made Aziza's long hair flat, made it wet pieces of hair, that threw water onto Zalmai when she quickly moved her head. Zalmai is nearly 6 years old. Aziza is 10 years old. They had a party for her birthday last week, brought her to a place called Cinema Park, where, finally, the movie Titanic was shown for everyone in Kabul to see.“COME ON, CHILDREN, we will be late,” Laila says. She is putting their lunches in a paper bag. It is eight o'clock in the morning. Laila woke up at five. Like always, Aziza woke her up for morning prayers (namaz). Laila knows that Aziza prays to feel close to Mariam. It is her way to keep Mariam near before she forgets her. Time is like a hand that pulls Mariam from her memory, like pulling a weed from the ground. After prayers, Laila went back to bed. She was still sleeping when Tariq left the house. She remembers a little that he kissed her cheek. Tariq has a job with a French group that helps people. This group gives new arms and legs to people who lost theirs because of land mines or other reasons.

Zalmai runs after Aziza into the kitchen. “Do you have your notebooks, pencils, and school books?” “Yes, they are here,” Aziza says, lifting her backpack. Again, Laila sees that she stutters less now. “Let's go, then.” Laila lets the children go out of the house. She locks the door. They go outside into the cool morning. It is not raining today. The sky is blue. Laila does not see many clouds far away. They hold hands and walk to the bus stop.

The streets are busy. There are many rickshaws, taxis, UN trucks, buses, and army cars (ISAF jeeps). Merchants look sleepy. They are opening their shops. They closed the metal doors at night. People selling things sit behind piles of chewing gum and cigarettes. The women whose husbands have died are already in their places on street corners. They are asking people for money. Laila thinks it is strange to be back in Kabul. The city has changed. Every day, she sees people planting small trees, painting old houses, and carrying bricks to build new ones. They dig channels for water and holes for water (wells). On windows, Laila sees flowers in old rocket parts. People in Kabul call them 'rocket flowers'. Recently, Tariq took Laila and the children to the Gardens of Babur. People are fixing them now. For the first time in many years, Laila hears music on the streets of Kabul. She hears different instruments like the rubab, tabla, dootar, harmonium, and tamboura. They play old songs by Ahmad Zahir. Laila wishes her mother and father were alive to see these changes. But, like the letter from Jalil, good things have come to Kabul too late.

Laila and the children are going to cross the street to the bus stop. Suddenly, a black car (a Land Cruiser) with dark windows drives past very fast. The car suddenly turns at the last moment. It almost hits Laila. It is very close, less than one arm's length away. It splashes brown water from the road all over the children's shirts. Laila quickly pulls her children back onto the path next to the road. Her heart is beating very fast because she is scared. The car drives away fast. It makes two loud noises (honks). Then it turns left quickly. Laila stands there. She is trying to breathe normally again. She holds her children's arms very tightly. This makes Laila feel very sad and angry. It makes her sad and angry that the war leaders are allowed back in Kabul. The people who killed her parents live in big, nice houses with walls around the gardens. They have important jobs in the government. They drive in new, safe cars (SUVs) without being stopped or punished. They drive through the parts of the city they destroyed. It makes her very sad and angry. But Laila has decided not to let this anger stop her. Mariam would not want this. She would say, 'Why be angry?' She would smile. Her smile was simple but also smart. 'What good does it do, Laila jo?' So Laila has decided to go on with her life. For herself, for Tariq, and for her children. And for Mariam, who comes to Laila in her dreams. Laila always feels Mariam is close, just below her thoughts. Laila has gone on with her life. Because she knows she can only do this. This and hope.

Zaman is standing on the basketball court. He is bending his knees and bouncing a basketball. He is teaching a group of boys. They are wearing the same shirts and sitting in a half-circle on the court. Zaman sees Laila. He puts the ball under his arm and waves. He says something to the boys. Then they wave and say loudly, “Hello, teacher!” Laila waves back. The place where the children play at the orphanage now has small apple trees along the wall that faces east. Laila wants to plant some on the south wall too. She will do this when the wall is built again. There are new swings, new monkey bars, and a climbing frame. Laila walks back inside. She goes through the door with a net.

They have painted the outside and the inside of the orphanage again. Tariq and Zaman have fixed all the holes in the roof where water came in. They have fixed the walls, put in new windows, and put carpet in the rooms where the children sleep and play. Last winter, Laila bought some beds for the children's sleeping rooms. She also bought pillows and warm wool blankets. She had metal heaters put in for the winter. Anis, a newspaper in Kabul, wrote a story about fixing the orphanage last month. They took a picture too. Zaman, Tariq, Laila, and one of the helpers stood in a line behind the children. When Laila saw the story, she thought of her friends from when she was a child, Giti and Hasina. She remembered Hasina saying, 'When we are twenty, Giti and I will have four or five children each. But you, Laila, you will make us two simple girls proud. You will be an important person. I know one day I will see your picture on the front page of a newspaper.' The picture was not on the front page. But it was in the newspaper, just like Hasina said it would be.

Laila turns and walks down the same long room (hallway). Two years before, she and Mariam brought Aziza here to Zaman. Laila still remembers how they had to open Aziza's fingers from her arm. She remembers running down this hallway. She was trying not to cry loudly. Mariam was calling her name. Aziza was screaming because she was very scared. Now, the walls of the hallway have posters. There are pictures of dinosaurs, cartoon characters, the Buddha statues of Bamiyan, and drawings by the children in the orphanage. Many drawings show army tanks driving over small houses, men holding guns (AK-47s), tents in places where people who left their homes live, and pictures of fighting for religion. Laila turns a corner in the hallway. Now she sees the children. They are waiting outside the classroom. She sees their headscarves, their heads with short hair covered by small hats, their small, thin bodies. She sees the simple beauty of their plain clothes. When the children see Laila, they start running. They run very fast. Many children come around Laila at once. They say hello loudly. Their voices are high. They touch her, hold her clothes, pull her, push each other to get into her arms. They hold out their small hands. They want her to notice them. Some of them call her Mother. Laila does not tell them not to. Laila has to work a little this morning to make the children quiet. She helps them stand in a line. She takes them into the classroom.

Tariq and Zaman built the classroom. They broke the wall between two rooms next to each other. The floor still has many cracks. Some floor pieces are missing. Now, they have put a large piece of cloth on the floor. But Tariq said he will put new floor pieces and carpet there soon. Above the door of the classroom, there is a long, flat piece of wood. Zaman made it smooth and painted it bright white. On it, Zaman has written four lines from a poem. Laila knows this is his answer to people who complain. They complain that the money promised to help Afghanistan is not coming. They say building things again is too slow. They say some people are stealing money (corruption). They say the Taliban are getting strong again and will come back to hurt people. They say the world will forget Afghanistan again. The lines are from a favorite poem by Hafez:
Joseph will come back home, do not be sad,
Small, poor houses will become beautiful gardens, do not be sad.
If a big flood comes and water covers everything,
Noah will help you in the middle of the storm, do not be sad.

Laila walks under the sign and goes into the classroom. The children are sitting down. They are opening their notebooks and talking quietly. Aziza is talking to a girl in the seats next to her. A paper airplane flies across the room in a high curve. Someone throws it back. “Open your Farsi books, children,” Laila says. She puts her books on her desk. The children open their books. Laila walks to the window. It has no curtains. Through the window, she can see the boys outside. They are standing in a line to practice throwing the basketball into the hoop. Above them, over the mountains, the sun is coming up in the morning. The sun shines on the metal edge of the basketball hoop, the chains of the tire swings, the whistle around Zaman's neck, and his new glasses that are not broken. Laila puts her flat hands on the warm glass of the window. She closes her eyes. She lets the sun shine on her face, her eyes, her forehead. When they first came back to Kabul, Laila was sad because she did not know where the Taliban buried Mariam. She wanted to visit Mariam's grave (the place where she was buried). She wanted to sit there for a while and leave some flowers. But now Laila sees that it is not important. Mariam is always close. She is here, in these walls they painted again, in the trees they planted, in the blankets that keep the children warm, in these pillows and books and pencils. She is in the children's happy sounds. She is in the lines from the Quran that Aziza says. She is in the quiet prayers Aziza says when she prays towards the west. But most of all, Mariam is in Laila's heart. She shines there like the bright light of a thousand suns. Laila understands that someone was calling her name. She turns around. She moves her head a little without thinking. She lifts the ear that can hear well. It is Aziza. “Mother? Are you OK?” The room is quiet now. The children are looking at her. Laila is going to answer. But suddenly she cannot breathe for a moment. She quickly puts her hands down. She touches the place where she felt something move inside her a moment before. She waits. But she does not feel the movement again. “Mother?” “Yes, my love.” Laila smiles. “I am OK. Yes. Very OK.” She walks to her desk at the front of the class. As she walks, Laila thinks about the game they played last night during dinner. It was a game about naming a baby. They play this game every night now. They started when Laila told Tariq and the children the news. They go back and forth. Each person says why their name choice is good. Tariq likes the name Mohammad. Zalmai watched a Superman film recently. He does not understand why a boy from Afghanistan cannot be named Clark. Aziza really wants the name Aman. Laila likes the name Omar. But the game is only for boys' names. Because, if the baby is a girl, Laila has already chosen the name.

AFTERWORD
For nearly 30 years, many people from Afghanistan have had to leave their homes. This is a very big problem in the world. War, not enough food, no government control, and cruel treatment made millions of people leave their homes. Tariq and his family in this story are like them. They left Afghanistan and went to nearby countries, Pakistan and Iran, to live. When most people were leaving, about eight million Afghans were living in other countries because they had to leave their homes. Today, more than two million Afghan people who left their homes still live in Pakistan. Last year, I was happy to work for UNHCR. This is a group from the United Nations that helps people who had to leave their homes. It is one of the most important groups that helps people in need. UNHCR's job is to keep the basic rights of these people safe. They give help in emergencies. They help people start their lives again in a safe place. UNHCR helps more than twenty million people who had to leave their homes in many countries. Not only in Afghanistan, but also in places like Colombia, Burundi, the Congo, Chad, and the Darfur area in Sudan. Working with UNHCR to help these people has been one of the best and most important things in my life. If you want to help, or just learn more about UNHCR, what it does, or the difficult situation of people who left their homes, please go to this website: www.UNrefugees.org. Thank you.
Khaled Hosseini January 31, 2007

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Some clear points before I say thank you. The village of Gul Daman is not a real place, I think. People who know the city of Herat will see that I changed the places around it a little in my story. Also, the name of this book comes from a poem. A Persian poet named Saeb-e-Tabrizi wrote it about 300 years ago. People who know the poem in Farsi will surely see that the English name of the book is not exactly the same as the line in the poem. But many people use this English name. Dr. Josephine Davis translated it this way. I think it is beautiful. I want to thank her. I would like to thank Qayoum Sarwar, Hekmat Sadat, Elyse Hathaway, Rosemary Stasek, Lawrence Quill, and Haleema Jazmin Quill. They helped me and supported me. Very special thanks to my father, Baba. He read what I wrote (this manuscript). He told me what he thought (feedback). And like always, he gave me his love and support. And to my mother. She is kind and always thinks of others. Her gentle spirit is in this story. You are my reason, Mother jo. I thank my wife's family. They were very kind and giving. To all my other great family members, I am thankful to every single one of you. I want to thank my agent, Elaine Koster, because she always believed in me. Also, Jody Hotchkiss, David Grossman, Helen Heller, and Chandler Crawford who worked very hard. I am thankful to everyone at Riverhead Books. I especially want to thank Susan Petersen Kennedy and Geoffrey Kloske. They believed in this story. I also want to give a big thank you to Marilyn Ducksworth, Mih-Ho Cha, Catharine Lynch, Craig D. Burke, Leslie Schwartz, Honi Werner, and Wendy Pearl. Special thanks to Tony Davis. He checked my writing carefully and did not miss anything (copy editor). And last, to my good editor, Sarah McGrath. Thank you for being patient, thinking ahead, and helping me. Finally, thank you, Roya. You read this story many times. You helped me when I sometimes felt I could not do it. You never stopped believing. This book would not be here without you. I love you.

POSTSCRIPT BY KHALED HOSSEINI
These words are from a speech I gave at Book Expo America on June 2, 2007. I started writing like Amir, the boy in my other book, The Kite Runner. I grew up in Kabul in the 1970s. I wrote poems and small plays. I asked my brothers, sisters, and cousins to perform them for our parents at parties. I also wrote short stories. I remember they were dark and strong. They were very emotional, and I was not afraid to show it. In a simple way, they were about being true to others, friendship, and problems between rich and poor people. They were not written in a clever or special way. But they had a big, good heart. Some people have used these words to describe The Kite Runner, and maybe they are right. The language I write in has changed. I first wrote in Farsi, then in French. Now I mostly write in English. But one thing is always the same: I always wrote for only one person – myself. For me, writing was always a bit selfish. It was for me to tell myself a story. Something makes me interested. It makes me want to sit down and finish the story. This is how I wrote The Kite Runner. I was thinking about two boys. One boy was confused and did not always do the right thing. The other boy was good and always true and honest. I knew their friendship would not last. I knew they would have a big fight. I knew this would change the lives of people around them in a very important way. Thinking about how and why this would happen made me want to sit down and write that book in March 2001. I never planned to have the book printed and sold. Even when I had written two-thirds of the book, I never thought anyone else would read it. Maybe my wife would, because she loves me. So you can imagine how surprised I was when people all over the world liked The Kite Runner after it was printed. People from many places like India, London, Sydney, Paris, and Arkansas wrote letters to me. They told me how much they loved the book. Many of them wanted to know how to send money to Afghanistan. Some told me they wanted to take care of a child from Afghanistan who had no parents. In those letters, I saw how stories can connect people who are different. They can wear different clothes or have different religions. I saw that some feelings are the same for everyone. Like friendship, feeling bad about something you did, saying sorry, losing someone, and making up for something you did wrong. In those letters, I also saw that I had put myself in a difficult place without planning to. I had to write another book after The Kite Runner. The new book would be compared to The Kite Runner, even when it was just finished. Every time I read a letter from a fan, I felt worried and scared for the new book that was not written yet. I was worried about my family. They would have to be patient with me while I wrote this new book. I made things more difficult. I decided to write a story with two main characters, and both of them were women. I decided this when I was finishing The Kite Runner. That book was only about a father and son and men's lives. I wanted to write another love story in Afghanistan. But this time it would be about a mother and daughter. It would be about the feelings and lives of two Afghan women who faced many problems. Maybe there were easier ways to write a book. But I chose this story. As a writer and as an Afghan person, I thought the problems of women in my country were the most interesting and important story to tell. For a story, no other topic was as strong or interesting.

Sadly, people all over the world often see the picture of a woman wearing a burqa. She is walking past a serious, angry Taliban man. This picture is very well known. When I was in Kabul in 2003, I met a man. He worked to protect a person who had a job in the government. He told me a story, not in a serious way. He said he saw a Taliban man hit a woman on the street. When he told the story, he used a strong and shocking way of speaking. He said the man hit her so hard it was like milk from her mother came out of her bones. When I heard that story, it felt strange to me that this happened in Kabul. Not many years ago, women in Afghanistan worked in important jobs. They were teachers at universities, doctors, and lawyers. They worked in hospitals and schools. They were an important part of society. They were like my mother. She studied at university. She taught Farsi and history. Later, she became the second head teacher of a very big school for girls. But this was in Kabul. Most people in Afghanistan do not live in cities and are not from families with normal jobs and money. There was always a difference in ideas between Kabul, which was more modern, and the parts of Afghanistan outside the cities. The sad truth is that bad treatment of women, like the Taliban did, was already happening in some parts of Afghanistan a long time before the Taliban even started. Kabul was a place where women had more freedom, compared to other places. But in the parts of Afghanistan outside the cities, especially in the south and east near Pakistan, men have always made the decisions for women. This area has strong family groups ruled by men. In those places, women have always lived away from other people. They have always worn the burqa outside. They did not often go to school after they were twelve. So many women in those areas could not read or write. For hundreds of years, men there have told women when and who they must marry. And also, how much money will be paid for the marriage. Mostly, women in the countryside of Afghanistan have lived quiet lives. They have done what they were told and served others.

You might be surprised, but in the last 100 years, people tried many times to make women in Afghanistan free. These ideas started in Kabul. In the 1920s, there was a king named Amanullah. He said women could not wear the burqa in public places. He built the first hospital only for women and the first school for girls. He brought teachers from Europe. He sent women to Europe so they could study. Amanullah tried to stop people from making women marry someone they did not want. He tried to make the youngest age for marriage for girls sixteen. He tried to stop the custom of paying money for a bride. Sadly, because he tried to do these things, people fought against him. They made him leave the city. He died when he was old in a different country because he could not go home. Other people tried to make changes in the 1950s, 60s, and 70s. Some of these attempts were successful. In 1964, women in Afghanistan got the right to vote. But the changes made in Kabul were always met with people from the family groups led by men laughing at them, not respecting them, or sometimes fighting against them. This happened to King Amanullah. So, you can see, life was difficult for some women in Afghanistan even before the Taliban. But life became almost impossible when different groups started fighting, there was no government, and people had extreme ideas. In many ways, that is when very bad things started happening. Women suffered from bombs and attacks on places where people lived, just like everyone else. They were also hit, hurt very badly, made to feel ashamed, and put in prison. Their basic human rights were broken many times. And many women were also hurt because they were women. They were taken by force and sold like slaves. They were made to marry leaders of fighting groups. They were forced into being sex workers. And they were raped. This is a terrible crime that is hard to forgive. It was used to scare families who did not agree with one fighting group or another.

Today, after the Taliban and after the 9/11 attacks, people in Afghanistan are talking about making women free again. This is the right thing to do. The unfair system where women have fewer rights than men, which was forced on Afghan women, is one of the big, bad things in the world today that has not been fixed. Also, Afghanistan needs its women. The plan to build Afghanistan again will fail if the basic human rights of women are not respected. And if women are not allowed to be part of building the country. Queen Soraya, King Amanullah's wife, said: 'Do not think that our country only needs men to work for it. Women should also help, like women did a long time ago in the early days of Islam. History tells us about the important things women have done. From them, we learn that all of us must help our country grow stronger.' The Queen said that in 1926. I think her words are still important 80 years later. Maybe they are even more important now. I went back to Kabul in 2003. I met many different kinds of people. I remember standing on street corners and seeing women covered completely. They walked with many children following them, maybe four, five, six, or seven children. I remember thinking, who is this person under the clothes? What has she seen? What hard things has she lived through? What makes her happy? What makes her sad? What does she hope for? What does she want very much? What things have made her unhappy? In some ways, A Thousand Splendid Suns is my try at imagining answers to these questions. It is my try to show the feelings and lives of these two women in the story. I want to show that they are just normal people under their covers. A Thousand Splendid Suns is very important to me. I worked on it with love. I hope it does not sound like I think I am too important, but I see it as a small way to show respect for the great courage, strength, and ability of people in Afghanistan to get through hard times. I hope that I will make you interested. I hope I will take you to that place in your mind. I hope the book will make you feel things. I hope you will feel kindness and understanding for Afghan women. Not many groups of people in the world recently have suffered as much as they have.
Khaled Hosseini

READING GUIDE
Short summary
Mariam is a 'harami'. This means she is a child whose parents were not married. She only sees her father, who she loves, one time every week. On those special days, they go fishing. He reads to her and gives her nice presents. But she can never live with him. She decides to visit his house. But he does not let her in or say she is his daughter. She goes back home and finds that her mother has killed herself by hanging. Her father's wives do not want her to live with them. So they make her marry Rasheed. He is an old man whose wife has died. He lives in Kabul. This is far away so people can forget about Mariam. This marriage quickly becomes bad. Rasheed is cruel to Mariam. Life is sad. It becomes worse when Rasheed also marries Laila, a girl who has no parents. Laila has a daughter, not a son. Rasheed is not happy about this. So he is also cruel to Laila. But in this sad house, a strong friendship grows between the two women. It is as close as a marriage. It will last even after they die. Khaled Hosseini's second book is written in a beautiful way. It tells a strong story about family and friendship. It also tells about 30 years of difficult history in Afghanistan. In the end, it is about hope.

Background
Many people know that Khaled Hosseini is a good storyteller. His first book, The Kite Runner, was very famous. He wrote it early in the morning before he went to his job as a doctor. Hosseini grew up with a tradition of telling stories. He said that telling stories is the most important thing about writing books. This is very important in A Thousand Splendid Suns. The book mixes the interesting stories of Mariam and Laila with the very difficult history of Afghanistan for the last 30 years. Hosseini said writing this book was even better for him than writing The Kite Runner. He said it was more difficult and went in ways he did not expect. With his first book, Hosseini wanted to show people in Western countries a different picture of Afghanistan. They often saw pictures of war on TV, first when Russia was there, then under the Taliban. He wanted to show them the country he remembered from when he was a child. He also wanted to correct some wrong ideas that people in his new country had about Afghanistan. Many people wrongly thought that women were treated badly even before the Taliban came to power. But they were not, not like under the Taliban. In the 1960s and 70s, which some people call the 'Golden Years,' women did many important things in Afghanistan. Hosseini's mother, for example, taught at a school for girls. A new set of laws in the 1970s said that women had rights. In his second book, Hosseini writes about the part women play in society. He shows this clearly through the stories of Mariam and Laila. They are from different times, but they have a very strong friendship that cannot be broken. These two women live through the cruel treatment from their husband Rasheed. They also live through the terrible actions of the Taliban. But they stay strong and do not change who they are. Hosseini's family asked for safety in the United States in 1980, soon after Russia attacked Afghanistan. Hosseini went back to Afghanistan after 27 years away. He went after the Taliban lost power. He wanted to see his country again very much. He also wanted to see how things were there. He came back to the United States feeling hopeful. But he did not feel as hopeful as he wanted to. He said that the safety problems and the drug business were two big worries.

About the author
Khaled Hosseini was born in Kabul, Afghanistan in 1965. He moved to the United States in 1980. His first book, The Kite Runner, was very popular all over the world. It was printed in 34 countries. In 2006, he was chosen to be a person from the US who helps the United Nations group that works with people who had to leave their homes. He lives with his wife and two children in Northern California.

For discussion
- The book starts with 'Mariam was five years old the first time she heard the word harami.' How important is this word in the book? How does it change Mariam's life because her parents were not married?
- The book says, 'The next time Mariam signed her name... a mullah would again be present.' Khaled Hosseini often hints about things that will happen later in the story, in the family and in the country. How does this make the story feel?
- The book says, 'But it was the women who drew Mariam’s eyes the most.' What does Mariam find interesting about the women in Kabul? Why? How do the different governments in Afghanistan treat women? How does the book show the main women characters? Are these women different from what you thought women in Afghanistan were like?
- Mariam does not want to marry Rasheed. She asks her father not to make her. What is Rasheed like as a husband? How do her feelings for him change? How does their marriage change? Why do you think Rasheed acts like he does?
- The book says, 'And in this quick moment... Laila knew that they were not enemies any longer.' How do Mariam and Laila become such close friends? How does their friendship help them?
- How is the practice of Islam different in Kabul compared to Mariam's home city, Herat? What is the role of religion in her life? How important is religion in the book?
- Laila's father says, 'To me, it's stupid and bad... all this talk about being Tajik, Pashtun, Hazara, Uzbek. We are all Afghans, and that's what is important.' How important are these different groups of people in the book? How important are they in the history of Afghanistan during the 30 years in the book?
- Why is the name of the book important? Why do you think Hosseini chose this name?
- What do you think about how the book ends?
- How would you describe how Hosseini writes? Were there parts in the book that you liked very much? Which parts, and why?
- How does the book show Western countries and Russia? How do they cause problems in Afghanistan?
- Hosseini is an Afghan person who lives in another country. How much do you think this changed how he wrote A Thousand Splendid Suns? How much do you think it changed how he showed Afghanistan in the book?

Resources
- www.khaledhosseini.com – Khaled Hosseini’s website
- www.barnesandnoble.com/writers/writerdetails.asp?z=y&cid=1145572#interview – interview published on Barnes and Noble’s website
- www.afghanmagazine.com/2004_06/profile/khosseini.shtml – conversation with Farhad Ahzad published on afghanmagazine.com
- www.bloomsbury.com/Authors/microsite.asp?id=480&section=1&aid=863 – conversation between Hosseini and Riverhead Books, his American publisher
- http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_ asia/1162108.stm – Afghanistan timeline published at the BBC’s website

Suggested further reading
Fiction:
Half of a Yellow Sun by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
A Married Woman by Manju Kapur
The Woman Who Walked into Doors by Roddy Doyle
Swallows of Kabul by Yasmina Khadra
Non-fiction:
The Sewing Circles of Herat by Christina Lamb
The Bookseller of Kabul by Asne Seierstad

Other books by Khaled Hosseini
The Kite Runner

A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR
Khaled Hosseini was born in Kabul, Afghanistan and moved to the United States in 1980. His first novel, The Kite Runner, was an international bestseller, published in thirty-four countries. In 2006 he was named a US goodwill envoy to the United Nations Refugee Agency. He lives with his wife and two children in Northern California.